The Beginning 


I n order to understand both the spirit of Tradition and its antithesis, modem civi¬ 
lization, it is necessary to begin with the fundamental doctrine of the twonatuies. 
According to this doctrine there is a physical order of things and a metaphysical one; 
there is a mortal nature and an immortal one; there is the superior realm of “being” 
and the inferior realm of “becoming.” Generally speaking, there is a visible and 
tangible dimension and, prior to and beyond it, an invisible and intangible dimension 
that is the support, the source, and true life of the former. 

Anywhere in the world of Tradition, both East and West and in one form or 
another, this knowledge (not just a mere “theory”) has always been present as an 
unshakable axis around which everything revolved. Let me emphasize the fact that 
it was knowledge and not “theory.” As difficult as it may be for our contemporaries 
to understand this, we must start from the idea that the man of Tradition was aware 
of the existence of a dimension of being much wider than what our contemporaries 
experience and call “reality.” Nowadays, after all, reality is understood only as some¬ 
thing strictly encompassed within the world of physical bodies located in space and 
time. Certainly, there are those who believe in something beyond the realm of phe¬ 
nomena. When these people admit the existence of something else, however, they 
are always led to this conclusion by a scientific hypothesis or law, or by a speculative 
idea, or by a religious dogma; they cannot escape such an intellectual limitation. 
Through his practical and immediate experiences, modem man, no matter how deep 
his “materialistic” or “spiritual” beliefs may be, develops an understanding of rea lity 
only in relation to the world of physical bodies and always under the influence of his 
direct and immediate experiences. This is the real materialism for which our con¬ 
temporaries should be reproached. All the other versions of materialism that are 
formulated in scientific or in philosophical terms are only secondary phenomena. 
The worst type of materialism, therefore, is not a matter of an opinion or of a “theory,” 
but it consists in the fact that man’s experience no longer extends to nonphysical 


3 



The World of Trodm 


The Beginning 


realities. Thus, the majority of the intellectual revolts against “materialistic” views 
are only vain reactions against the latest peripheral effects stemming from remote 
and deeper causes. These causes, incidentally, arose in a different historical context 
from the one in which the “theories” were formulated. 

The experience of traditional man used to reach well beyond these limits, as in 
the case of some so-called primitive people, among whom we still find today a faint 
echo of spiritual powers from ancient times. In traditional societies the “invisible” 
was an element as real, if not more real, than the data provided by the physical 
senses. Every aspect of the individual and of the social life of the people belonging 
to these societies was influenced by this experience. 

On the one hand, from the perspective of Tradition, what today is usual ly re¬ 
ferred to as “reality,” was only a species of a much wider genus. On the other hand, 
invisible realities were not automatically equated with the “supernatural.” Tradi¬ 
tionally speaking, the notion of “nature” did not correspond merely to the world of 
bodies and of visible forms—the object of research of contemporary, secularized 
science—but on the contrary, it corresponded essentially to part of an invisible real¬ 
ity. The ancients had the sense of a dark netherworld, populated by obscure and 
ambiguous forces of every kind (the demonic soul of nature, which is the essential 
substratum of all nature’s forms and energies) that was opposed to the superrational 
and sidereal brightness of a higher region. Moreover, the term nature traditionally 
included everything that is merely human, since what is human cannot escape birth 
and death, impermanence, dependence, and transformation, all of which character¬ 
ize die inferior region. By definition, “that which is” has nothing to do with human 
and temporal affairs or situations, as in the saying: “The race of men is one thing, 
and the race of the gods is quite another.” This saying retains its validity even though 
people once thought that the reference to a superior, otherworldly domain could 
effectively lead the integration and the purification of the human element in the 
direction of the nonhuman dimension. Only the nonhuman dimension constituted the 
essence and the goal of any truly traditional civilization. 

The world of being and the world of becoming affect things, demons, and men. 
Every hypostatic representation of these two regions, whether expressed in astral, 
mythological, theological, or religious terms, reminded traditional man of the exist¬ 
ence of the two states; it also represented a symbol to be resolved into an inner 
experience, or at least in the foreboding of an inner experience. Thus, in Hindu, and 
especially in Buddhist tradition, the idea of samsara—the current that dominates and 
carries away every form of the inferior world—refers to an understanding of life as 
blind yearning and as an irrational identification with impermanent aggregates. Like¬ 
wise, Hellenism saw nature as the embodiment of the eternal state of “deprivation” 


of those realities that, by virtue of having their own principle and cause outside of 
themselves, flow and run away indefinitely (del peovrot). In their becoming, these 
realities reveal a primordial and radical lack of direction and purpose and a peren¬ 
nial limitation. 1 According to these traditions, “matter” and “becoming” express the 
reality that acts in a being as an obscure necessity or as an irrepressible indetermina¬ 
tion, or as the inability to acquire a perfect form and to possess itself in a law. What 
the Greeks called dvarjKaiov and aneipov, the Orientals called ndharma. Chris¬ 
tian Scholastic theology shared similar views, since it considered the root of every 
unredeemed nature in terms of cupiditas and of appetitus innatus. In different ways, 
the man of Tradition found in the experience of covetous identification, which ob¬ 
scures and impairs “being,” the secret cause of his existential predicament. The in¬ 
cessant becoming and the perennial instability and contingency of the inferior region 
appeared to the man of Tradition as the cosmic and symbolical materialization of 
that predicament. 

On the other hand, the experience of asceticism was regarded as the path lead¬ 
ing to the other region, or to the world of “being,” or to what is no longer physical but 
metaphysical. Asceticism traditionally consisted in values such as mastery over one¬ 
self, self-discipline, autonomy, and the leading of a unified life. By “unified life” 1 
mean an existence that does not need to be spent in search of other things or people 
in order to be complete and justified. The traditional representations of this other 
region were solar symbols, heavenly regions, beings made of light or fire, islands, 
and mountain peaks. 

These were the two “natures.” Tradition conceived the possibility of being bom 
in either one, and also of the possibility of going from one birth to another, according 
to the saying: ”A man is a mortal god, and a god is an immortal man.”" The world of 
Tradition knew these two great poles of existence, as well as the paths leading from 
one to the other. Tradition knew the existence of the physical world and the totality 
of the forms, whether visible or underground, whether human or subhuman and de¬ 
monic, of vnepKOopict, a “world beyond this world.” According to Tradition, the 
former is the “fall” of the latter, and the latter represents the “liberation” of the 
former. The traditional world believed spirituality to be something beyond life and 
death. It held that mere physical existence, or “living,” is meaningless unless it ap¬ 
proximates the higher world or that which is “more than life,” and unless one’s high¬ 
est ambition consists in participating in vnepKOopia and in obtaining an active and 


1, Sec Plotinus, Ennends, 1.8,4-7; 6.6.18. 

2. Heraclitus, frag. 62 Diels; Coqms Hcmicticum 12.1. 


4 


5 




The World of Trrditiod 

final liberation from the bond represented by the human condition. According to 
Tradition, every authority is fraudulent, every law is unjust and barbarous, every 
institution is vain and ephemeral unless they are ordained to the superior principle of 
Being, and unless they are derived from above and oriented “upward.” 

The traditional world knew divine kingship. It knew the bridge between the two 
worlds, namely, initiation; it knew the two great ways of approach to the transcen¬ 
dent, namely, heroic action and contemplation; it knew the mediation, namely, rites 
and faithfulness; it knew the social foundation, namely, the traditional law and the 
caste system; and it knew the political earthly symbol, namely, the empire. 

These are the foundations of the traditional hierarchy and civilization that have 
been completely wiped out by the victorious “anthropocentric” civilization of our 
contemporaries. 


6 


2 



Regality 


E very traditional civilization is characterized by the presence of beings who, by 
virtue of their innate or acquired superiority over the human condition, em¬ 
body within the temporal order the living and efficacious presence of a power that 
comes from above. One of these types of beings is the pontifex, according to the 
inner meaning of the word and according to the original value of the function that he 
exercised. Pontifex means “builder of bridges,” or of “paths” (pons, in ancient times, 
also meant “path”) connecting the natural and the supernatural dimensions. More¬ 
over, the pontifex was traditionally identified with the king (rex). Servius, a late 
fourth-century commentator on Virgil’s works, reports: “The custom of our ancestors 
was that the king should also be pontifex and priest.” A saying of the Nordic tradition 
reads: “May our leader be our bridge.” 1 Thus, real monarc hs were the steadfast 
personification of the life “beyond ordinary life.” Beneficial spiritual influences used 
to radiate upon the world of mortal beings from the mere presence of such men, from 
their “pontifical” mediation, from the power of the rites that were rendered effica¬ 
cious by their power, and from the institutions of which they were the center. These 
influences permeated people’s thoughts, intentions, and actions, ordering every as¬ 
pect of their lives and constituting a fit foundation for luminous, spiritual realiza¬ 
tions. These influences also made propitious the general conditions for prosperity, 
health, and “good fortune.” 

In the world of Tradition the most important foundation of the authority and of 
the right (ius) of kings and chiefs, and the reason why they were obeyed, feared, and 
venerated, was essentially their transcendent and nonhuman quality. This quality 
was not artificial, but a powerful reality to be feared. The more people acknowl¬ 
edged the ontological rank of what was prior and superior to the visible and temporal 
dimension, the more such beings were invested with a natural and absolute sover¬ 
eign power. Traditional civilizations, unlike those of decadent and later times, 

1. See the Mnbinogion. 


1 



Thj World of taiion 


Rt&flUTD 


completely ignored the merely political dimension of supreme authority as well as 
the idea that the roots of authority lay in mere strength, violence, or natural and 
secular qualities such as intelligence, wisdom, physical courage, and a minute con¬ 
cern for the collective material well-being. The roots of authority, on the contrary, 
always had a metaphysical character. Likewise, the idea that the power to govern is 
conferred on the chief by those whom he rules and that his authority is the expression 
of the community and therefore subject to its decrees, was foreign to Tradition. It is 
Zeus who bestows the ei/uioreqon kings of divine origin, whereby Oipiq, or “law 
from above,” is very different from what constitutes vopoq, which is the political law 
of the community. The root of every temporal power was spiritual authority, which 
was almost a “divine nature disguised in human form.” According to an Indo-Euro¬ 
pean view, the ruler is not “a mere mortal,” but rather “a great deity standing in the 
form of a man.” 2 3 The Egyptian pharaoh was believed to be the manifestation of Ra 
or of Horns. The kings of Alba and of Rome were supposed to be the incarnations of 
Zeus; the Assyrian kings, of Baal; the Persian shahs, of the god of light. The Nordic- 
Germanic princes were believed to derive from the race of Tiuz, of Odin, and of the 
Aesir, and the Gieek kings of the Doric-Achaean cycle were called 8ioxp£\i/££qo\' 
8ioy£V££q in reference to their divine origin. Beyond the variety of mythical and 
sacred expressions, the recurrent view of kingship is expressed in terms of an “im¬ 
manent transcendence” that is present and active in the world. The king—who was 
believed to be a sacred being and not a man—by virtue of his “being,” was already 
the center and the apex of the community. In him was also the supernatural strength 
that made his ritual actions efficacious. In these actions people could recognize the 
earthly counterpart of supernatural ‘ruling,” as well as the supernatural support of 
life in the world of Tradition. 1 For this reason, kingship was the supreme form of 
government, and was believed to be in the natural order of things. It did not need 
physical stiength to assert itself, and when it did, it was only sporadically. It imposed 
itself mainly and irresistibly through the spirit. In an ancient Indo-Aryan text it is 
written: “The dignity a god enjoys on earth is splendid, but hard to achieve for the 
weak. Only he who sets his soul on this objective, is worthy to become a king.” 4 5 The 
ruler appears as a “follower of the discipline that is practiced by those who are gods 
among men.”' 

In Tradition, kingship was often associated with the solar symbol. In the king, 
people saw the same “glory” and “victory” proper to the sun and to the light (the 

2. The Laws ol'Manu, 7.8. 

3. Conversely, in Greece and m Rome, if the king was found unworthy of the priestly office, he could no 
longer be king. 

4 . Nitisnrn, 4 . 4 , 

5. (bid,, 1,63, 


symbols of the superior nature), which every morning overcome darkness. “Every¬ 
day he rises on Horus’s throne, as king of the living, just like his father Ra [the sun].” 
And also: “I have decreed that you must eternally rise as king of the North and of the 
South on the seat of Horus, like the sun.” These sayings from the ancient Egyptian 
royal tradition bear a striking similarity to the sayings of the Persian tradition, in 
which the king is believed to be “of the same stock as the gods”: “He has the same 
throne of Mithras and he rises with the Sun”; he is called particeps siderum and 
“Lord of peace, salvation of mankind, eternal man, winner who rises in company of 
the sun.” In ancient Persia the consecrating formula was: “Thou art power, the force 
of victory, and immortal.. . Made of gold, thou rise, at dawn, together with Indra and 
with the sun.” In the Indo-Aryan tradition, in reference to Rohita, who is the “con¬ 
quering force” and who personifies an aspect of the radiance of the divine fire (Agni), 
we find: “By coming forward, he [Agni] has created kingship in this world. He has 
conferred on you [Rohita] majesty and victory over your enemies.” 6 In some ancient 
Roman representations, the god Sol (sun) presents the emperor with a sphere, which 
is the symbol of universal dominion. Also, the expressions sol conservator and sol 
dominus romani imperii , which are employed to describe Rome’s stability and ruling 
power, refer to the brightness of the sun. The last Roman profession of faith was 
“solar,” since the last representative of the ancient Roman tradition, the emperor 
Julian, consecrated his dynasty, his birth, and royal condition to the brightness of the 
sun, 7 which he considered to be a spiritual force radiating from the “higher worlds.” 
A reflection of the solar symbol was preserved up to the time of Ghibelline emper¬ 
ors—one may still speak of a deltas solis in reference to Frederick II of Hohenstaufen. 

This solar “glory” or “victory” in reference to kingship was not reduced to i 
mere symbol, but rather denoted a metaphysical reality. Eventually it came to b< 
identified with a nonhuman operating force, which the king did not possess in and b; 
himself. One of the most characteristic symbolic expressions of this idea comes fron 
the Zoroastrian tradition, wherein the hvareno (the “glory” that the king possesses) is 
a supernatural fire characterizing heavenly (and especially solar) entities that al¬ 
lows the king to partake of immortality and that gives him witness through victory. 
This victory must be understood in such a way that the two meanings, the first mys¬ 
tical, the second military (material), are not mutually exclusive but rather comple¬ 
mentary/ Among non-Persian people, this hvareno was later confused with “fate” 
(rvxrf). With this meaning it reappeared in the Roman tradition in the form of the 

6. Athnrva Veda, 13.1.4—5, 

7. Emperor Julian. Hymn to King Helios, 131b. 

8. Concerning the hvareno. see Vasin (19): "We sacrifice to the awesome kingly Glory made by Mazda; most 
conquering, highly working, that possesses health, wisdom and happiness, and is more powerful to destroy 
than all other creatures," The A vest a Major Portions, ed. and trails. Rev. E. G. Busch (1985). 


8 


9 



The World of Trad™ 


Regalitli 


“royal fate” that the Caesars ritually transmitted to each other, and in which the 
people recognized an active, “triumphal” undertaking of the personified destiny of 
the city (rdjp noXecog), determined by the ritual of their appointment. The Roman 
regal attribute Felix must be referred to this context and to the possession of an 
extranonnal virtus. In the Vedic tradition we find a parallel notion: Agni-Vaishvanara 
is conceived as a spiritual fire that leads the conquering kings to victory. 

In ancient Egypt the king was not called merely “Horus," but “fighting Homs" 
(Hor aha), to designate the victorious and glorious character of the solar principle 
present in the monarch. The Egyptian pharaoh, who was believed to descend from 
the gods, was “enthroned” as one of them, and later on in his life he was periodically 
reconfirmed in his role through rituals that reproduced the victory of the solar god 
Horus over Typhon-Set, a demon from the netherworld A These rites were thought to 
have such a power as to evoke the “force” and the “life" that supematurally encom¬ 
passed the king’s person. The hieroglyphic for “force” (uns) is the scepter handled 
by gods and kings alike. In the oldest texts, the scepter is portrayed as the zigzag bolt 
of lightning. The regal “force” thus appears as a manifestation of the dazzling, heav¬ 
enly force .The combination of signs represented the concept of “life-force” (nnshus), 
form a word for “fiery milk,” which is the nourishment of the immortals. This word is 
not without relation to urueus, the divine flame, at times life-giving, at other times 
dangerously destructive, which crowns the head of the Egyptian king in the shape of 
a serpent. 

In this traditional formulation, the various elements converge in the idea of a 
nonterrestrial power or fluid (su). This power consecrates and gives witness to the 
solar, triumphant nature of the king, and “gushes” forth from one king to the other, 
thus guaranteeing the uninterrupted and “golden” sequence in the divine lineage, 
which is legitimately appointed to the task of rege re. Interestingly enough, the theme 
of “glory” as a divine attribute is found even in Christianity, and according to mysti¬ 
cal theology the beatific vision takes, place within the "glory of God.” Christian ico¬ 
nography used to portray this glory as a halo around the person’s head, thus visibly 
representing the meaning of the Egyptian uraeus and of the glowing crown of the 
Persian and Roman solar kings. 

According to a Far Eastern tradition, the king, as a “son of heaven” who is 
believed to have nonhuman origins, enjoys the “mandate of heaven” (lien ming), 
which implies the idea of a real and supernatural force. Tins force that comes “from 
heaven, according to Lao-tzu, acts without acting (wei wu weri through an immate- 

9. One phase ot these rites was the "walking in circles," reproducing the journey of the Min, Along the king's 
path an animal dear to Typhon was sacrificed as a magical, ritual evocation of HoruYs victory over 
Typhon-Set. 


rial presence, or by virtue of just being present. 10 It is as invisible as the wind, and yet 
its actions are as ineluctable as the forces of nature. When this power is unleashed, 
the forces of common men, according to Meng-tzu, bend under it as blades of grass 
under the wind. 11 Concerning wu wei , a text says: 

By its thickness and substantiality, sincerity equals earth; and by its 
height and splendor it equals heaven. Its extent and duration are with¬ 
out limit. He who possesses this sincerity, without showing himself, he 
will shine forth, without moving he wit! renovate others; without acting, 
he will perfect them. 12 

Only such a man, “is able to harmonize the opposing strands of human society, to 
establish and to maintain moral order in the country.” 13 

Established in this force or “virtue,” the Chinese monarch (wang) performed the 
supreme role of a center, or of a third power between heaven and earth. The common 
assumption was that the fortunes and misfortunes of the kingdom, as well as the moral 
qualities of his subjects (it is the “virtue” in relation to the “being” of the monarch, 
and not his “actions,” that carries positive or negative influences on them), secretly 
depended on the monarch’s behavior. The central role exercised by the king presup¬ 
posed that the king maintained the aforesaid “triumphal” inner way of being. In this 
context, the meaning of the famous saying, “Immutability in the middle,” may corre¬ 
spond to the doctrine according to which, “in the immutability of the middle, the vir¬ 
tue of heaven is manifested.” 14 If this principle was implemented as a general rule, 
nothing could have changed the arranged course of human events or those of the state. 15 

In general, the fact that the king’s or chief’s primary and essential function con¬ 
sisted in performing those ritual and sacrificial actions that constituted the center ol 
gravity of life is a recurrent idea in a vast cycle of traditional civilizations, from pre- 

10. Tuo tc Ching, 37. 

11. Lun-yu, 12. IS. In the Clwng-yung it is written that the secret actions of heaven are eminently immaterial: 
they are "without sound or scent" and as subtle as the "lightest feather." Ezra Pound, turns., Chung Yung: 
The Unwobbling Pivot (New York, 1969). 33.6. 

12. Ibid., 26.5-6. 

13. Ibid.. 31.1. 

14. Lun-yu (6.27): "The tine medium is virtue. This is the highest attainment. For a long time few people have 
reached it. 1 ' 

15. The Chinese distinguished between the imperial function and the emperor’s person. The imperial func¬ 
tion is believed to be divine and to transfigure the person invested with it. When the emperor is enthroned 
he renounces his personal name and adopts instead an imperial name. He is not so much a person as a 
neutral element, one of the forces of nature, or something like the sun or a polar star. A natural catastro¬ 
phe or a popular rebellion signify that the individual lias betrayed the principle, which nevertheless still 
stands. These events are a heavenly sign of the emperor's decadence; not of the imperial function, but of 
the individual himself. 


10 


u 




The Would oe Tmnion 


REGOLITy 


Columbian Peru to the Far East, and including Greek and Roman cities. This idea 
confirms the inseparability of royal office from priestly oi pontifical office. Accoid- 
ing to Aristotle, "the kings enjoy their office by virtue ol being the officiating priests 
at their community’s worship.” 16 The first duty of the Spartan kings was to perform 
sacrifices, and the same could be said about the first kings of Rome and of many 
rulers during the imperial period. The king, empowered with a nonterrestrial force 
with its roots in something that is “more than life, naturally appealed as one who 
could eminently actualize the power of the rites and open the way leading to the 
superior world. Thus, in those traditional forms of civilization in which there was a 
separate priestly class, the king, because of his original dignity and function, be¬ 
longed to this class and was its true leader. In addition to early Rome, this situation 
was found both in ancient Egypt (in order to make the rites efficacious, the phaiaoh 
repeated daily the prayer that was believed to renew the divine force in his person) 
and in Iran, where, as Xenophon recalls, 17 the king, who according to his function 
was considered the image of the god of Light on earth, belonged to the caste of Magi 
and was its leader. On the other hand, if among certain people there was the custom 
of deposing and even of killing the chief when an accident or a catastrophe oc¬ 
curred_for this seemed to signify a decrease in the mystical force of "good fortune” 

that gave one the right to be chief'this custom gives witness to the same order of 
ideas, although in the form of a superstitious degeneration. In the Nordic racial stocks 
up to the time of the Goths, and notwithstanding the principle of royal sacredness 
(the king was considered as an Aesir and as a demigod who wans in battle thanks to 
the power of his ‘'good fortune”), an inauspicious event was understood not so much 
as the absence of the mystical power of “fortune” abiding in the king, but rather as 
the consequence of something that the king, as a mortal man, had done, thus compro¬ 
mising the objective effectiveness of his power. It was believed, lor instance, that 
the consequence for failing to implement the fundamental Aryan virtue of always 
telling the truth, and thus being stained by lies, caused the "glory,” or the mystical 
efficacious virtue, to abandon the ancient Iranian king, \ ima. 1 All the way up to the 
Carolingian Middle Ages and within Christianity itself, local councils of bishops were 
at times summoned in order to investigate what misdeed perpetrated by a represen¬ 
tative of the temporal or ecclesiastical authority could have caused a given calamity. 
These are the last echoes of the abovementioned idea. 

16. Aristotle, Politics 6,5.2. 

17. Cyropacdiiu 8.26, 

IB. In La Mentnlite primitive (Parts. 10251, Levy-Bruit! showed that "primitive peoples believed that "a 
catastrophe disqualified the leader.” 

19. Yusht, 19.34—38. The hvxrena withdraws three times following rhe triple dignity of Vimu as a priest, 
warrior, and shepherd. 


The monarch was required to retain the symbolic and solar dignity of invictus 
(sol invictus, tjfaog aviKrjrog), as well as the state of inner equilibrium that corre¬ 
sponds to the Chinese notion of “immutability in the middle”; otherwise the force 
and its prerogatives would be transferred to another person who could prove worthy 
of it. I will mention in this context a case in which the concept of “victory” became a 
focal point of various meanings. There is an interesting ancient saga of Nemi’s King 
of the Woods, whose royal and priestly office was supposed to be conferred on the 
person capable of catching him by surprise and slaying him. J. G. Frazer tracked 
down numerous traditions of the same kind all over the world. 

In this context, the physical combat aspect of the trial, if it had to occur, is only 
the materialistic transposition of some higher meaning, and it must be related to the 
general view of “divine judgments” (more on which later). Concerning the deepest 
meaning of the legend of Nemi’s king-priest, it must be remembered that according 
to Tradition, only a “fugitive slave” (esoterically speaking, a being who had become 
free from the bonds of his lower nature), armed with a branch tom off a sacred oak, 
had the right to compete with the Rex Nemorensis (King of the Woods). The oak is 
the equivalent of the “Tree of the World,” which in other traditions is frequently 
adopted as a symbol designating the primordial life-force and the power of victory. 20 
This means that only a being who has succeeded in partaking of this force may 
aspire to take the place of the Rex Nemorensis. Concerning this office, it must be 
observed that the oak and the woods, of which Nemi’s priest-king was rex, were 
related to Diana. In turn, Diana was the “bride” of the king of the woods. In some 
ancient, eastern Mediterranean traditions, the great goddesses were often symbol¬ 
ized by sacred trees. From the Hellenic myth of the Hesperides, to the Nordic myth 
of the goddess Idun, and to the Gaelic myth of Magh-Mell, which was the residenci 
of very beautiful goddesses and of the “Tree of Victory,” it is possible to notici 
traditional symbolic connections between women or goddesses, forces of life, im¬ 
mortality, wisdom, and trees. 

Concerning the Rex Nemorensis, we can recognize in the symbols employed 
that the notion of kingship derives from having married or possessed the mystical 
force of “life,” of transcendent wisdom and immortality that is personified both by 
the goddess and by the tree. 21 Nemi’s saga, therefore, incorporates the general sym¬ 
bol, which is found in many other myths and traditional Legends, of a winner or of a 

20. The nsviitthii tree of the Hindu tradition has its roots in heaven, or in the invisible dimension {Kaput 
Upnnisnd 6.1-2: BhtighavadgTtS, 16.L-2). In the first of these texts, the tree is related to the vital force 
(pninii) and to the "thunderbolt.” Since the tree is related to the power of victory, the usviitthn is consid¬ 
ered the ally of Indra, the warrior god. slayer of Vrtra. 

2 1. In the Egyptian tradition the "name" of the pharaoh was written by the gods on the sacred tree usht'd, thus 
becoming "perennial.” In the Persian tradition there is a relationship between Zarathustra who was. 
among the Parsis, the prototype of the divine king, and a heavenly tree planted on top of a mountain. 




The World oe Tradition 


REGflUTy 


hero who possesses a woman or a goddess. The goddess appears in other traditions 
either as a guardian of the fruits of immortality (see the female figures in relation to 
the symbolical tree in the myths of Heracles, Jason, Gilgamesh, and so on), or as a 
personification of the occult force of the world, of life and of nonhuman knowledge, 
or as the embodiment of the principle of sovereignty (the knight or the unknown hero 
of the legend, who becomes king after taking as his bride a mysterious princess)." 

Some of the ancient traditions about a female source of royal power 23 may also 
be interpreted in this fashion; their meaning, in that case, is exactly opposite to 
gynaecocracy, which will be discussed later. As far as the tree is concerned, interest¬ 
ingly enough, even in some medieval legends it is related to the imperial ideal; the 
last emperor, before dying, will hang the scepter, the crown, and the shield in the 
“Dry Tree,” which is usually located in the symbolical region of “Prester John,” just 
like the dying Roland hung his unbreakable sword in the tree, This is yet another 
convergence of symbolical contents, for Frazer has shown the relationship existing 
between the branch that the fugitive slave must break off Nemi’s sacred oak in order 
to fight with Nemi’s king and the branch Aeneas carried to descend, while alive, into 
the invisible dimension. One of the gifts that Emperor Frederick II received from the 
mysterious Prester John was a ring that renders invisible and victorious the one who 
wears it. Invisibility, in this context, refers to the access to the invisible realm and to 
the achievement of immortality; in Greek traditions the hero’s invisibility is often 
synonymous with his becoming immortal. 

This was the case of Siegfried in the Niebelungen (6), who through the same 
symbolic virtue of becoming invisible, subjugates and marries the divine woman 
Brynhild. Biynhild, just like Siegfried in the Siegdrifuiml { 4-6), is the one who be¬ 
stows on the heroes who “awaken” her the formulas of wisdom and of victory con¬ 
fined in the runes. 

Remnants of traditions, in which we find the themes contained in the ancient 
saga of the King of the Woods, last until shortly beyond the end of the Middle Ages. 
They are always associated with the old idea, according to which a legitimate king is 
capable of manifesting in specific, concrete and almost experimental ways, the signs 
of his supernatural nature. The following is just one example: prior to the Hundred 
Years War, Venice asked Philip of Valois to demonstrate his actual right to be king 

22, The Roman tradition of the gens Julia, which traced its origins to Venus victrix and to Venus gcniirix, 
shared this perspective. In the Japanese tradition, until a few years ago, the origin of the imperial power 
was attributed to a solar deity (Amaterasu Omikami), and the focal point of the ceremony of enthrone¬ 
ment (dajo-sai) represented the contact the emperor established with her through the "offering of new 
food.” 

23, In ancient India, for instance, the essence of royalty was condensed in a divine or semidivine woman t$n\ 
Lak$mr, PadmS) who chose and “embraced 1 ' the king, thus becoming his bride, notwithstanding the king's 
human wives. 


in one of the following ways. The first way, victory over a contender whom Philip 
was expected to fight to the death in an enclosed area, reminds us of the Rex 
Nemorensis and of the mystical testimony inherent in every victory. 24 As far as the 
other examples are concerned, we read in a text dating back to those times: 

If Philip of Valois is, as he affirms, the true king of France, Let him 
prove the fact by exposing himself to hungry lions; for lions never at¬ 
tack a true king; or let him perform the miraculous healing of the sick, 
as all other true kings are wont to do. If he should fail, he would own 
himself to be unworthy of the kingdom . 25 

A supernatural power, manifested through a victory or through a thaumaturgical 
virtue, even in times like Philip’s, which are no longer primordial times, is thus in¬ 
separably connected with the traditional idea of real and legitimate kingship. 26 Aside 
from the factual adequacy of single individuals to the principle and to the function of 
kingship, what remains is the view that "‘what has led people to venerate so many 
kings were mainly the divine virtues and powers, which descended on the kings 
alone, and not on other men as well.” Joseph de Maistre wrote: 27 

God makes kings in the literal sense. He prepares royal races; maturing 
them under a cloud which conceals their origin. They appear at length 
crowned with glory and honor; they take their places; and this is the 
most certain sign of their legitimacy. The truth is that they arise as it 
were of themselves, without violence on their part, and without marked 
deliberation on the other: it is a species of magnificent tranquillity, not 
easy to express. Legitimate usurpation would seem to me to be the 
most appropriate expression (if not too bold), to characterize these kinds 
of origins, which time hastens to consecrate . 28 

24. Later on, 1 will expound the noli on that in this context appears in a materialistic form, Traditionally the 
winner was helieved to incarnate a nonhuman energy; in him there were two phases of the same act: he 
was the point of convergence of a "descent" and of an "ascent." 

25. Mare Bloch, The Royal Touch (New York, 1961}, i-ii. 

26. Tradition also ascribed the thaumaturgical virtue to the Roman emperors Hadrian and Vespasian (Tacitus, 
Historiac, 4.8 1). Among the Carolingians it is still possible to find a residue of the idea that the supernatu¬ 
ral power penetrated even die royal clothes. Beginning with Robert the Pius (French dynasty) and Ed¬ 
ward the Confessor (English dynasty) until the age of revolutions, the thaumaturgical power was trans¬ 
mitted from one royal generation to the other. The power at first could heal all diseases, but with the 
passing of time it could only heal a few. C, Agrippa (De occulta philosophia. 3.35) wrote: "Righteous 
kings and pontifices represent God on earth und partake of his power. Jf they touch the sick, they heal 
them from their diseases.” 

27. Joseph de Maistre, Essay on the Generative Principle of Constitutions (reprint, New York, 1977), 19-20. 

28. In this passage of de Maistre, wc find again the mystical view of victory, since "taking their place” is 
considered "the most certain sign of their legitimacy.' 1 


14 


15 



Polar SomBOLism 


3 


Polar Symbolism; 
the Lord of Peace and Justice 

I t is possible to connect the integral and original understanding of the regal func¬ 
tion with a further cycle of symbols and myths that point back in the same one 
direction through their various representations and analogical transpositions. 1 

As a starting point, vve may consider the Hindu notion ot the cakravartin, or 
"universal king." The cakravartin may be considered the archetype of the regal func¬ 
tion of which various kings represent more or less complete images or even particu¬ 
lar expressions whenever they conform to the traditional principle. Cakravartin liter¬ 
ally means "lord" or "spinner of the wheel." This notion brings us back again to the 
idea of a center that corresponds also to an inner state, to a way of being, or better 
yet, to the way of Being. 

Actually the wheel also symbolizes samsSra or the stream of becoming (the 
Hellenes called it kvkXoc, rfjg yeveaecog, the "wheel of generation," or KVxXog 
avdyKTig, "the wheel of Fate"). Its motionless center signifies the spiritual stability 
inherent in those who are not affected by this stream and who can organize and 
subject to a higher principle the energies and the activities connected to the inferior 
nature. Then the cakravartin appears as the dharrnarilja, the "Lord of the Law," or 
the "Lord of the Wheel of the Law." 2 According to Confucius: "The practice of gov¬ 
ernment by means of virtue may be compared to the polestar, which the multitudi¬ 
nous stars pay homage to while it stays in its place." 3 Hence the meaning of the 

1. See R. Guenon’s Le Roi du monde (Paris, 1927), in which several corresponding traditions have been 
gathered and interpreted. [English trails. The Lord of (he World (ElIingstring, 1083).] 

2, According to this tradition, the “wheel” has also a “triumphal" meaning: its appearance as a heavenly 
wheel is the visible sign of conquerors’ and rulers’ destinies. Like a wheel, die chosen one will go forth, 
sweeping away and dominating everything on his path (see the legend of die “Great Magnificent One” in 
DTglui NikUyu, 17). As far as the organizing function is concerned, we may recall die Vedic image of the 
“cosmic order's (rta) bright and terrible chariot which confounds the enemies.” Rg Veda, 2.23.3. 

3. The Analects, trans. R, Dawson (Oxford, 1993), 2.1. 


concept of “revolution," which is the motion occurring around an "unmoved mover,” 
though in our modem day and age it has become synonymous with subversion. 

In this sense royalty assumes the value of a "pole," by referring to a general 
traditional symbolism. We may recall here, besides Midgard (the heavenly "middle 
abode" described in Nordic traditions), Plato’s reference to the place where Zeus 
holds counsel with the gods in order to reach a decision concerning the fate of Atlantis: 
"He accordingly summoned all the gods to his own most glorious abode, which stands 
at the center of the universe and looks out over the whole realm of change." 4 The 
abovementioned notion of cakravartin is also connected to a cycle of enigmatic tra¬ 
ditions concerning the real existence of a "center of the world" that exercises this 
supreme function here on earth. Some fundamental symbols of regality had origi¬ 
nally a close relationship with these ideas. One of these symbols was the scepter, the 
main function of which is analogically related to the "axis of the world." s Another 
symbol is the throne, an “elevated" place; sitting still on the throne evokes, in addi¬ 
tion to the meaning of stability connected to the "pole" and to the "unmoved mover,” 
the corresponding inner and metaphysics I meanings. Considering the correspondence 
that was originally believed to exist between the nature of the royal man and the 
nature produced by initiation, in the classical Mysteries we find a ritual consisting of 
sitting still on a throne. This ritual appears to have been very important since it was 
sometimes equated with initiation itself. The term reOpovicjevog , enthroned, is of¬ 
ten synonymous with TeXeTetjf-ievog, "initiate." 6 In fact, in some instances, in the 
course of an initiation the Gpoviopog, or royal enthronement, preceded the experi¬ 
ence of becoming one with the god. 

The same symbolism is embodied in the ziggurat, the Assyrian-Babylonian ter¬ 
raced pyramid, as well as in the master plan of the capital of the Persian kings (as in 
Ecbatana) and in the ideal image of the cakravartin's royal palace. In these places 
we find the architectural expression of the cosmic order complete in its hierarchy 
and in its dependence upon an unmoved center. From a spatial perspective this cen¬ 
ter corresponded, within the building itself, to the king’s throne. Similar to Hellas, in 
India we find forms of initiation that employ the ritual of the so-called inandaia. 
These forms dramatize the gradual ascent of the initiate from the profane and de¬ 
monic space to a sacred space, until he reaches a center. A fundamental ritual sym¬ 
bolizing this journey is called mukatabhisaka and it consists in being crowned or in 
being given a tiara; he who reaches the "center” of the mandaki is crowned as king 
because he is now believed to be above the interplay of the forces at work in the 

4. Critias, 121. 

5. R. Gu6non, Auiorite spirituelle ct pouvuir temporcl (Paris, 1929), 137. 

6. V, Magnien, Les Mysteres d'Eleusis (Paris, 1929), 196. 


16 


17 



The World of Iradiiior 


Polar fomBOLism 


inferior nature, 7 It is interesting that the ziggurat, the sacred building towering 
above the city-state of which it was the center, was called “cornerstone” in Babylon 
and “link between heaven and earth” in Lhasa; 8 the theme of the “rock” and of the 
“bridge” is pretty much summed up in the Far Eastern expression: “third power be¬ 
tween Heaven and Earth.” 

The importance of these traces and correlations should not be overlooked. More¬ 
over, “stability” has the same double dimension; it is at the center of the Indo-Aryan 
formula for consecration of the kings: 

Remain steady and unwavering ... Do not give in. Be strong like a 
mountain. Stay still like the sky and the earth and retain control of power 
at all times. The sky, the earth and the mountains are unmoved as un¬ 
moved is the world of living beings and this king of men . 9 

In the formulas of the Egyptian royalty, stability appears as an essential attribute that 
complements the attribute of “power-life” already present in the sovereign. And just 
as the attribute of “vital-force,” the correspondence of which with a secret fire has 
already been emphasized, “stability” too has a heavenly counterpart. Its hieroglyphic, 
djed , conveys the stability of the “solar gods resting on pillars or on light beams.” 10 
These examples bring us back to the system of initiations, since they are much more 
than abstract ideas; like “power” and “vital-force”; “stability” too, according to the 
Egyptian tradition, is simultaneously an inner state of being and an energy, a virtus 
that flows from one king to the next, and which sustains them in a supernatural way. 

Moreover, the “Olympian” attribute and the attribute of “peace” are connected 
to the condition of “stability” in the esoteric sense of the word. Kings “who derive 
their power from the supreme god and who have received victory at his hands,” are 
“lighthouses of peace in the storm.” 11 After “glory,” centrality (“polarity”), and sta¬ 
bility, peace is one of the fundamental attributes of regality that has been preserved 
until relatively recent times. Dante talked about the imperator pacitlcus, a title pre¬ 
viously bestowed on Charlemagne. Obviously, this is not the profane and social peace 
pursued by a political government—a kind of peace that is at most an external con¬ 
sequence—but rather an inner and positive peace, which should not be divorced 
from the “triumphal” element. This peace does not convey the notion of cessation, 
but rather that of the highest degree of perfection of a pure, inner and withdrawn 
activity. It is a calm that reveals the supernatural. 

7. G, Tucci, Teona e pratiea clei mnndala (Rome, 1949), 30—32: 50-51. 

8. C, Dawson, The Age of (he Gods (New York, 1933), 6.2. 

9. Rg Veda, i0.173. 

10. Moret, Royautdphuraonique. 42-43. 

11. Corpus Hermcticum, 18.10-16. 


According to Confucius a man destined to be a ruler (the “virtuous”), unlike ordi¬ 
nary men, “rests in rectitude and is stable and unperturbed”; “the men of affairs enjoy 
life, but the virtuous prolongs it.” 12 Hence that great calm that conveys the feeling of 
an irresistible superiority and terrifies and disarms the adversary without a fight. This 
greatness immediately evokes the feeling of a transcendent force that is already mas¬ 
tered and ready to spring forward; or the marvelous and yet frightful sense of the 
numenTThe paxromana etaugusta, which is connected to the transcendent sense of 
the imperium, may be considered one of the several expressions of these meanings in 
the context of a universal historical realization. Conversely, the ethos of superiority 
over the world, of dominating calm and of imperturbability combined with readiness 
for absolute command, which has remained the characteristic of various aristocratic 
types even after the secularization of nobility, must be considered an echo of that ele¬ 
ment that was originally the regal, spiritual, and transcendent element. 

The cakravartin, besides being the “Lord of Peace,” is “Lord of the Law” (or 
cosmic order, ft a) and “Lord of Justice” (dhaimaraja). “Peace” and “justice” are two 
more fundamental attributes of royalty that have been preserved in Western civili¬ 
zation until the time of the Hohenstaufens and Dante, even though the political as¬ 
pect predominated over the higher meaning presupposing it. 14 Moreover, these at¬ 
tributes were also found in the mysterious figure of Melchizedek, king of Salem, one 
of the many representations of the function of the “universal king.” Guenon has pointed 
out that in Hebrew, mekki-tsedeq means “king of justice,” while Salem, of which he 
is king, is not a cily, but rather “peace,” at least according to Paul’s exegesis. 1? Tra¬ 
dition upholds the superiority of Melchizedek’s royal priesthood over Abraham’s. It 
is not without a deep reason that Melchizedek was present in the enigmatic medi¬ 
eval allegory of the “three rings,” and that he declared that neither Christianity nor 
Islam know any longer which is the true religion; moreover, the “royal religion of 

12. The Analects , 6.21, 

13. In ancient times the fulgurating power, symbolized by the broken scepter and by the pharaoh's c/raeus, 
was not a mere symbol; likewise many acts found in court ceremonies were not mere expressions of 
formalism and servile adulation of the pharaoh, but rather were induced by spontaneous sensations awak¬ 
ened in the subjects by the royal Wrfu.s. Somebody visited an Egyptian king of the Twelfth Dynasty, and 
later recalled; “When 1 came close to His Highness I prostrated myself and lost consciousness before 
liim. The god addressed me with friendly words, but J felt like I was suddenly blinded. 1 couldn’t think 
straight, my body went limp; rny heart gave way and l knew the difference between life and death." G. 
Maspero, Les Contes populaires de LEgypte ancienne (Paris, 1889), 123. See also The Laws of Munu, 
(7.6): “Like the Sun, he burns eyes and hearts and no one on earth is able even to look at him." 

14. Frederick II recognized that "justice" and “peace" are the foundation on which all kingdoms are built. 
“Justice" during the Middle Ages was often confused with "imth'’ and indicated the ontological dignity of 
the imperial principle. See A. De Stefa no, L’ idea imperiale di Federico If (Florence, 1927), 74. Among 
the Goths, truth and justice were often portrayed as rega I virtues par excellence. These are all traces of 
the doctrine of the origins, 

15. Heb. 7:1-3. 


19 



The World of Traditiofi 


Melchizedek” was often upheld by the Ghibelline ideology in the struggle against 
the Church. 

At this level, the expression “king of justice” is the equivalent of the previously 
mentioned dharmaraja, designating the “universal king.” From this expression we 
may gather that in this context, “justice” and “peace” do not have a secular meaning. 
In fact, dharrna in Sanskrit also means “proper nature of,” or the law typical of a 
certain being; the correct reference concerns the particular primordial legislation 
that hierarchically orders, in a system oriented upwards, every function and form of 
life according to the nature of every being (svadhaima), or “according to justice and 
truth.” Such a notion of justice is also characteristic of the Platonic view of the state; 
this view, rather than an abstract “utopian” model, should be regarded in many as¬ 
pects as an echo of traditional orientations from an even more distant past. In Plato 
the idea of justice ( SiKCtioovvr ]), of which the state should be the embodiment, is 
closely related to that of oiKEionpayia or caique suum, that is, with the principle 
according to which everybody should fulfill the function typical of his or her own 
nature. Thus the “king of justice” is also the primordial legislator, or he who insti¬ 
tuted the castes, assigned the offices, and established the rites; or, in other words, he 
who determined the ethical and sacred system that was called dhimnanga in Aryan 
India, and that in other traditions was the local ritual system that determined the 
norms for regulating individual and collective life. 

This presupposes that the roya] condition enjoys a higher power of knowledge. 
The capability to deeply and perfectly understand the primordial laws of human 
beings is the basis of authority and of command in the Far East. The Mazdean royal 
“glory” (hvoira-i-kaynni) is also the virtue of a supernatural intellect. And while 
according to Plato 16 the philosophers (oi ao0oi) should be at the top of the hierarchy 
of the true state, for him the abovementioned traditional idea takes on an even more 
specific form. For Plato, wisdom or “philosophy” is understood as the knowledge of 
“that which is,” rather than the knowledge of illusory visible forms. The philosopher 
is one who can effectively formulate laws conforming to justice precisely because 
he has the direct knowledge of that which is supremely real and normative. The 
conclusion Plato draws is: 

Until philosophers are kings, or the kings and princes of this world have 
the spirit and power of philosophers, and political greatness and wis¬ 
dom meet in one, and these commoner natures who pursue either to the 
exclusion of the other are compelled to stand aside, cities will never 
have rest from their evils, nor the human race itself . 17 


4 


The Law, the State, 
the Empire 

T he traditional society’s view of both the law and the state is closely related to 
the order of ideas that I have been discussing so far. Generally speaking, a 
transcendent realism is the presupposition of the traditional notion of the law. Espe¬ 
cially in Aryan formulations, the notion of law has an intimate relationship with the 
notions of truth, reality, and stability inherent to “that which is.” In the Vedas, the 
term fta often has the same meaning as dharrna; it not only signifies the order found 
in the world (the world as order, or Kdojuog ), but it has a deeper meaning whenever 
it designates truth, law, or reality, just as its opposite, anjta, designates falsehood, 
evil, or unreality. Thus, the world of the law and consequently of the state came to be 
equated with the world of truth and of reality in the eminent sense of the word, 

As a natural consequence, traditional man either ignored or considered absurd 
the idea that one could talk about laws and the obedience due them if the laws in 
question had a mere human origin—whether individual or collective. Every law, in 
order to be regarded as an objective law, had to have a “divine” character. Once the 
“divine” character of a law was sanctioned and its origin traced back to a nonhuman 
tradition, then its authority became absolute; this law became then something inef¬ 
fable, inflexible, immutable and beyond criticism. Thus, every transgression of such 
law was regarded not so much as a crime against society, but rather and foremost as 
sacrilege or as an act of impiety (aogpeict), or as an act that jeopardized the spiritual 
destiny of the person who disobeyed it as well as of the people with whom that 
person was socially related. This is why, up to and including medieval civilization, 
rebellion against authority and the imperial law was considered as serious a crime as 
religious heresy. Thus the rebels were considered just like heretics, namely, as the 
enemies of their own natures and as beings who contradict the law of their very own 


16. The Republic, 6.18; 6.1. 

17. The Republic , i rails. B. Jo wen (New York, 1977), 473. 


20 


21 


The World of TRRDinon 


The Law, the State, the Ehipire 


being. 1 2 Aryan India employed a special expression to designate those who broke the 
caste law: they were called ‘‘the fallen ones,” or ‘the lapsed” (more on winch later). 
The usefulness of the law in the modern sense of the word, that is, its collective and 
empirical usefulness, was never the true criterion adopted in ancient times; not that 
this aspect was never considered, but it was rather thought to be an accessory or a 
consequential aspect in every law, once a law was sanctioned as true. After all, there 
are different views of what constitutes usefulness. The notion of usefulness is the 
ultimate materialistic criterion of modem society, though that was not the case in 
traditional societies, which rather regarded it as a means to be employed in the func¬ 
tion of a higher purpose. But for a law to be considered useful it was necessary to 
appear as something other than a mere and repealable creation of the human will. 
Once it was established that its authority originated “from above,” its usefulness and 
efficacy were definitively acknowledged. This certainty was never questioned, even 
in those cases in which experience, in the most immediate and unrefined meaning of 
the word, did not confirm and even proved such a law to be wrong somehow, since as 
the saying goes, “the web of 'Heaven’s way* is complex and incomprehensible.” 
This is why in the traditional world the creation of a system of laws and rituals was 
always attributed to divine legislators or to divine mediators; these beings, in turn, 
were considered as various forms or apparitions of the “lord of the center,” or “king 
of justice,” the forms being determined by different geographical areas and by dif¬ 
ferent populations. And even when in more recent times the electoral system was 
introduced, tradition retained a partial formal existence when the people’s decision 
was not considered to be sufficient; in that case, in order for new laws to be finally 
ratified, it was necessary to obtain the approval of the pontifexes and to make sure 
that the diviners ascertained whether these laws enjoyed the gods’ approval." 

Moreover, laws and institutions, as in the case of all traditional civilizations, 
were both “from above” and oriented upwards. A political, economic, and social 
order created merely for the sake of temporal life is exclusively characteristic of the 
modem world, that is, of the anti tradition a! world. Traditionally the state had a tran¬ 
scendent meaning and purpose that were not inferior to the ones the Catholic Church 
claimed for itself in the West as a manifestation of and a path to, the "world above.” 
The very term “state,” in Latin status, from the Greek icrcavca. “to stay,” empiri¬ 
cally may have derived from the form of social life taken up by nomadic populations 

1. De Siefano, L'ideti imperial? (li Federico It, 75-79. 

2. “Cities did not inquire whether the institutions which they had adopted were useful or not: these institu¬ 

tions had hcen established because it so pleased religion .. . Originally the higher rule on which the social 

order was founded was not self-interest.’' Fustel tie Coulange.s. La Cite antique (Paris, 1900 k 365. (Up to 

Frederick II we still find the idea that the laws, to which the emperor himself is subjected, derive immedi¬ 
ately not from men or from the people, but from God himself. De Stefann, L "idea imprm-fe. 57.) 


once they permanently settled down; however, it may also point to a higher mean¬ 
ing, namely, to an order concerned with hierarchical participation in a spiritual “sta¬ 
bility” as opposed to the contingent, unstable, changeable, chaotic, and particularis¬ 
tic character of a naturalistic existence. This order constituted the accurate reflection 
of the world of being in the world of becoming, hence the words pronounced in the 
course of a Vedic royal consecration: “This world of the living is steady, and so is this 
king of the people.” In this way, traditional states and empires often employed the 
symbols of “centrality” and of “polarity” that have been associated with the arche¬ 
type of regality. 

Thus, while the ancient Chinese empire was called the Middle Empire and the 
seat of the world according to Nordic legends was called Midgard, the “middle abode” 
or center of the world, the capital of the Incas’ solar empire was called Cuzco, or 
“navel” ol the world. Likewise in ancient Greece, Delphi enjoyed the same designa¬ 
tion as the center of Doric civilization. It would be easy to find analogous references 
in different civilizations, all pointing to the ancient meaning of traditional states and 
organizations. Generally speaking, in prehistoric times the symbolism of “sacred 
stones” already points to the same order of ideas, the alleged fetishism of the cult of 
the stones partially being a mere fancy of modern researchers. The omphalos, or 
sacred stone, is not a naive representation of the shape of the world; its meaning in 
Greek (“navel”) brings it back to the idea of a “center,” of a “stable point”; audit can 
also be related to what may be called sacred geography: the “sacred stone” is often 
found, and not without reason, in selected ritual places that served as traditional 
centers in relation to a given historical cycle or to a given people. 3 The meaning of 
the “sacred stone” was often that of a “foundation from above,” especially when the 
stone was “from the sky,” namely, an aerolith. Some examples are the lapis niger of 
the ancient Roman tradition and the “stone of destiny," the black, fatal stone figuring 
in the British and Celtic traditions, which was important for its alleged ability to 
recognize legitimate kings among various pretenders to the throne. 4 Following the 
same order of ideas, in Wolfram von Eschenbach’s view the Grail was a mysterious 
“divine stone” that also had the power of revealing who was worthy of the royal 
dignity. 5 Hence, the obvious meaning of the trial consisting in being able to draw a 
sword from a stone (Theseus in Hellas, Sohrab in Persia, King Arthur in ancient 
Britannia, and so on). 

The doctrine of the two natures—which is the foundation of the traditional view 
of life—is also reflected in the relationship that exists between the state and the 

3. R. Guenon, Roi du inondc, chap. 9. 

4. J. L. Weston, 77) l* Quest of the Holy Grail (London, 1913), 12-13. 

5. See J. Evola, II mistcro del Graal c I’idea imperial? ghibeUina (Rome, 1972). 


22 


23 



The World of Tradition 


The Lfluj, tee State, the Eetipire 


people (demos). The idea that the state derives its origin from the demos and that the 
principle of its legitimacy and its foundation rests upon it is an ideological perversion 
typical of the modem world and essentially represents a regression; with this view 
we regress to what was typical of naturalistic social forms lacking an authentic spiri¬ 
tual chrism. Once this direction was taken, an inevitable downward spiraling oc¬ 
curred, which ended with the triumph of the collectivistic world of the masses and 
with the advent of radical democracy. This regression proceeds from a logical ne¬ 
cessity and from the physical law of gravity that affects falling bodies. According to 
the traditional view, on the contrary, the state was related to the people, just as the 
Olympian and Uranian principles are related to the chthonic and “infernal” world; or 
as “idea,” “fonn,” or vovq, are related to “matter,” “nature,” or or as the lumi¬ 
nous, masculine, differentiating, individualizing, and life-giving principle is related 
to the unsteady, promiscuous, and nocturnal feminine principle. Between these two 
poles there is a deep tension, which in the traditional world was resolved in the sense 
of a transfiguration and of the establishment of an order from above. Thus, the very 
notion of “natural rights” is a mere fiction, and the antitraditional and subversive use 
ot that is well documented. There is no such thing as a nature that is “good” in itself 
and in which the inalienable rights of an individual, which are to be equally enjoyed 
by every human being, are preformed and rooted. Even when the ethnic substance 
appears to be somewhat “well defined,” in other words, when it presents some el¬ 
ementary forms of order, these forms (unless they are residues and traces of previ¬ 
ous formative actions) do not have a spiritual value in and of themselves unless by 
participating in a higher order, such as when they are assumed in the state or an 
analogous traditional organization, they are first consecrated as being from above. 
In the end, the demos’s substance is always demonic (in the ancient, non-Christian, 
and amoral sense of the word); it always requires a catharsis or a liberation before it 
can act as a force (Svvajdtq) and as the material of a traditional political system, and 
before it can favor the development of a differentiated and hierarchical order of 
dignity over and beyond a naturalistic substratum. 

In this regard we shall see that the main principle upon which the differentiation 
between people and the hierarchy of the traditional castes is built has not been 
political or economical, but spiritual; and thus was developed an authentic system of 
participations as well as the progressive stages of a conquest and a victory of the 
cosmos over chaos. In addition to the four major castes, the Indo-Aryan tradition 
knew a broader and more significant distinction that points to the duality of natures; 

I am referring to the distinction between the Zrya or dvTja and the sudra. The former 
were the “nobles” or “the twice-born,” who represented the “divine” element (daivya). 
The latter were beings who belong to nature, and thus who represent the promiscu¬ 


ous substratum of the hierarchy that was gradually overcome by the formative influ¬ 
ence exercised within the higher castes, from the heads of the households to the 
bnihmana.^ Strictly speaking, this influence was the original meaning of the state 
and of the law within the world of Tradition; it had a meaning of supernatural “for¬ 
mation, even where it did not manifest itself immediately in visible ways, because 
of either incomplete applications of the principle or later materialistic and degenera¬ 
tive processes. 

These premises are the foundation upon which the potential affinity between 
the pi inciple ol every state and that of universahty is founded; wherever an action 
takes place that is aimed at constituting life beyond the limits of nature and of contin¬ 
gent and empirical existence, it is unavoidable that some forms not connected to the 
particular will maniiest themselves. The dimension of that which is universal may 
appear in different aspects and different degrees in various civilizations and tradi¬ 
tional organizations. The “formative process” always encounters resistance from 
matter, which in its determinations caused by time and space acts in a differentiating 
and particularistic sense in relation to the effective historical application of the one 
principle that in itself is superior and antecedent to these manifestations. Neverthe¬ 
less, there is no form of traditional organization—which despite any local character¬ 
istics, any empirical exclusivism, any “autochthonism” of the cults and institutions it 
jealously defends—that does not hide a higher principle; this principle is actualized 
whenever the traditional organization reaches the heights of the idea of the empire. 
Thus, there are occult ties of sympathy and of analogy between the individual tradi¬ 
tional fonnations and something unique, indivisible, and perennial, and these ties 
are portrayed in many ways. Once in a while it is possible to detect in certain histori¬ 
cal institutions (such as monarchies and empires) an esoteric and universal core that 
transcends the specific geographical and historical dimensions of said institutions, 
thus culminating in a unity of a higher kind; such are the imperial peaks of the world 
of Tradition. Ideally, one same line runs from the traditional idea of law and state to 
that of empire. 

We have seen that the opposition between the higher casles (which are charac¬ 
terized by rebirth) and the inferior caste of the sudra was considered by the Indo- 
Aryans as an opposition between the “divine” and the “demonic” element. In Iran 
the higher castes were believed to correspond to emanations of the heavenly fire 
descended to earth, and more specifically upon three distinct “peaks”; after the “glory” 

6, Often the caste of the sildn), or servants, was considered to be "demonic” fastv/ya) in opposition to the 
caste of the bnlhmunn, which was considered to he "divine” f dnivyn) and at the peak of the hierarchy of 
the "twice-born,” 


24 


25 



The UJorld of Tmditkhi 


The Liiiu, the Strtc, the EmpiRE 


(hvareno), the supreme form that was embodied in kings and priests, such supernatu¬ 
ral fire descended hierarchically to castes or classes of the warriors and of the 
patriarchical wealthy leaders (rathaestha and vastriya-ishuyant) until it reached and 
“glorified” the lands occupied by Aryan descent. 7 8 9 10 

In the ancient Persian tradition, this was the background against which a meta¬ 
physical view of the empire was formulated in the terms ot a reality unrelated to 
space and time. There are two possibilities: on the one hand there is the ashavan, the 
pure, the “faithful” on earth and the blessed in heaven. The ashavan is one who 
boosts the power of the principle of light here on earth, in the domain proper to him. 
The ashavan is exemplified by the members of three classes: the lords of the ritual 
and of fire, who exercise an invisible power over occult influences: the warriors, 
whose job is to fight against barbarians and impious people; and finally, those who 
work on the dry and arid land, whose job is a militia, since fertility is almost a victory 
that increases the mystical virtus of the Aryan land. 

On the other hand, opposed to the ashavan , are the anashvan. the impure ones, 
those without law, or those who oppose the principle of light. In this context, the 
empire as a traditional system governed by the "king of kings" corresponds to what 
the principle of light has successfully snatched from the snares of the principle of 
darkness; the limit of the empire is illustrated by the myth ot the hero Shaoshan, the 
universal lord of a future, complete, and victorious kingdom of "peace.”' 1 

A similar idea is found in the legend according to which the emperor Alexander 
the Great contained the onslaught of the peoples of Gog and Magog by building an 
iron wall. These people may represent in this context the "demonic'' element that in 
the traditional hierarchies was successfully subjugated; one day these people will 
flood the earth in pursuit of conquest but they will ultimately be challenged by fig¬ 
ures who, according to medieval sagas, will embody the archetype of the leaders of 
the Holy Roman Empire. 11 A similar idea is expressed in some Nordic traditions with 
the image of the bulwarks that protect the "middle abode” (the legendary Midgard) 
from the elementary powers and that one day will be overpowered during the "twi¬ 
light of the gods” (the ragna-rokkr)."' The relationship between aeternitas and 

7. In V'a.dir {19.9) it is said (Tint the "glory" belongs "to the Aryan people who have already been bom ami 
who arc yet to be bom, and to the holy ZarailniMra." This reminds us of the notion of “men of the primor¬ 
dial tradition" (panirvirthueshnh which was considered the true Aryan religion in even nge, before and 
after Zarathusira. 

8. Bundnhesh, 30.10; Vasin, 29.89-90. 

9. This deed of Alexander the Great is described in the Koran f 18:93), in which he is called Dhul-Qaniain. 
Gog and Magog are also found in the Hindu tradition with the similar names of the demons Koka and 
Vikoka, who will be destroyed at the end of the present age by Kalki-avatara, yet another messianic- 
imperial figure. See my II rnisiero del Graa/ c I'icien impennlc ghihellinn, 

10. Gylidginning, 8.42; Volusp:i, 82. 


impenum is also tound in the Roman tradition; hence the transcendent, nonhuman 
character with which the notion of regere is associated; this is why the pagan world 
credited the gods for the greatness of Rome, the city of the eagle and of the axe. 
According to another view endowed with a deeper meaning, the “world” will not 
end as long as the Roman Empire existed. This idea is connected to the function of 
mystical salvation attributed to the empire, provided that the “world” is not under¬ 
stood in physical or political terms but rather in terms of “cosmos” and of a dam of 
order and stability containing the disruptive forces of chaos. 11 

In relation to this theme, the Byzantine continuation of the Roman ideal ac¬ 
quires a particular meaning owing to the markedly theological and eschatological 
nature animating that ideal. The empire, which even in this context is conceived as 
an image of the heavenly kingdom, is willed and preordained by God. In the empire 
the earthly sovereign (the paoitevg avro lepdrcop) is himself an image of the Lord 
of the universe; as the Lord himself, the sovereign is alone and without a second. He 
presides over both the temporal and the spiritual domains and his formal right is 
universal. This right extends even over people who have an autonomous govern¬ 
ment and who are not directly subjected to the real imperial power (any such govern¬ 
ment being considered “barbaric” and not “according to justice,” since it has a mere 
naturalistic foundation). The subjects of the empire are the “Romans” (pcojicuoi), no 
longer in an ethical and juridical sense, but in the sense of a superior dignity and 
chrism, since they live in the pax guaranteed by a law that is a reflection of the divine 
law. The imperial ecumene sums up the order of “salvation” as well as that of the 
law in the higher sense of the word. 12 

The ideal of the empire reemerged one more time in the Ghibelline Middle 
Ages with the same metahistorical content, that is, as a supernatural universal insti¬ 
tution created by Providence as a re medium contra infirmhatem peccati in order tc 
straighten the fallen human nature and direct people to eternal salvation. This ideal 
was for all practical purposes paralyzed both by the Church and by historical circum¬ 
stances, which precluded its comprehension as well as its effective realization ac¬ 
cording to its higher meaning. Dante, for instance, from a traditional point of view 
was correct in claiming for the empire the same origins and supernatural destiny of 
the Church. He was also correct in talking about the emperor as one who, “owning 

1 I. The dynamic interplay between the two opposite principles was represented in Aryan India during the feast 
of gnvilin-uyiina, during which a black sudnt wrestled against a white Aryan for the possession of a solar 
symbol. One of the Nordic myths tells about a knight in white armor who fights against a knight in black 
armor; the knight in black wins the contest, but will eventually be vanquished once and for all by a king. 
12. On an analogous basis in Islam we find the geographical distinction between Dar al-Islam, or "Land of 
Islam," ruled by divine laws, and Dar al-Harb.of'Land of War," the inhabitants of which must be brought 
into Dar al-Islam by means of jihad or "holy war." 


26 


27 




everything and no longer wishing for anything else,” is free of concupiscence, and 
who can therefore allow peace and justice to reign and thus strengthen the active life 
of his subjects; after the original sin, this life can no longer resist the seductions of 
cupiditas unless a higher power controls it and directs it, 1 -' 

Although he expressed traditionally correct views about the empire, Dante 
Alighieri was unable to carry these ideas beyond the political and material plane. In 
Dante’s view, the emperor’s ‘‘perfect possession” is not an inner possession, typical 
of “those who are” but it is rather a territorial possession. Also, the cupiditas that he 
abhors is not the root of an unregenerated life tied to the law of becoming and lived 
out in a naturalistic state, but rather the cupiditas of the princes competing for power 
and riches. Again, according to him, “peace” is that of the “world,” which constitutes 
the anticipation of a different order beyond that of the empire and of a contemplative 
life in an ascetical Christian sense. 

Tradition lives on, however, although only in faint echoes. With the Hohenstaufen 
dynasty Tradition had a last bright flicker; eventually the empires would be replaced 
by “imperialisms” and the state would be understood only as a temporal, national, 
particularistic, social, and plebeian organization. 


13. Dante, Convivrum, 4.5.4; Dc moruirchin, 1.11. 1 1-14. 


28 


5 



The Mystery of the Rite 


A s the king by divine right was the center of the traditional state, two elements, 
rite and faithfulness (fides), connected particular components and activities 
within the social order to this center and allowed individuals to partake of the tran¬ 
scendent influence emanating from the sovereign. 

The rite was the original cement binding together traditional organizations, 
whether large or small, considered in their nonnaturalistic dimension. The rite was 
first of all the prerogative of the king; second, of the aristocratic or priestly classes 
and of the magistrates (whom the Greeks called oi £V it& te, “those whose responsi¬ 
bility is to perform sacrifices”) 1 ; and finally, of the patres, or heads of households. 
Rites and sacrifices were regulated by detailed and strict traditional norms that left 
no room for anything arbitrary or subjective. The performance of rites and sacrifices 
was imperative, iusstrictum: a ritual or sacrifice that was neglected or performed by 
an unqualified person, or performed in a way that did not conform to traditional 
rules, was considered a cause of misfortune for both individuals and society, since it 
unleashed dreadful powers both in the moral and in the material order. Conversely, 
in the classical world it was said that the priest in charge of the holy fire “saved” the 
city through his ritual, day after day.- In the Chinese tradition, to establish the rites 
was the first of the three most important things in the government of an empire, since 
the rites were the “channels by which we can apprehend the ways of Heaven.” 3 In 
the Hindu tradition, the “sacrificial sites” were considered to be the seats of the 
“cosmic order” (pta) itself;' 1 it is very significant that the expression pta ( artha , in 

1, F. de Coulanges, 2 ] 1. 

1 Pindar, The Nemenn Odes, 11.1-5. 

3. Li~Chi, 7.4.6: "H was on this account that the sages knew that the rules of ceremony could not be dispensed 
with, while the ruin of states, the destruction of families and the perishing of individuals are always 
preceded by their abandonment of the rules of propriety .” According to the Indo-Aryan tradition, not only 
truth, order and asceticism, but ritual formulations and sacrifices as well are the foundations of all human 
organizations. 

4, Rg Veda, 10.124.3. 


29 



The World of ]mwm 


The Itany of the Rite 


Persian) appears in connection with analogous conceptions as the root of the Latin 
word ritus , “ritual action.” In the ancient traditional way of life, both at an individual 
and at a collective level, every action was connected with a determined ritual ele¬ 
ment that acted as its support and as the transfiguring and guiding element “from 
above.” The tradition of rites and sacrifices, which was often confused with the leg¬ 
islative tradition (hence the notion of ius sacrum ), referred both in the private and in 
the public dimensions to a nonhuman being or to a being who had transcended the 
human condition. This can hardly be comprehended by the modem, secular mental¬ 
ity that views every ritual either as an “outdated” superstition or as a mere cer¬ 
emony 5 6 to be appreciated merely for the sake of its symbolical, aesthetical, or emo¬ 
tional value. At this point I wish to discuss some of the aspects and meanings of this 
particular form of the traditional spirit. 

As far as “sacrifice” is concerned, according to a text universally regarded as 
very old, Brahman, “which in the beginning constituted the entire universe, created 
a higher and more perfect form of itself” from which the “gods of the warriors” 
(Indra, Mitra, and so on) came into existence.* 1 

The primordial power’s ability to go beyond itself, an act that is credited 
with the origination of entities that are the heavenly archetypes of the divine and 
triumphal regality, is strictly connected with the nature of an entire class of 
sacrifices. A similar idea is found in a cycle of other myths in which we witness 
a fundamental identity between heroes and gods who fight victoriously against 
the personifications of the forces of chaos. 7 This is the same notion of a primor¬ 
dial power that reacts against itself, frees itself, and ascends to a higher plane 
of being that defines its peculiar divine aspect (the Upanisad *s “highest and most 
perfect form of itself”). This plane of being often manifests itself in a law or in 
a principle of order. For example, the Chaldean hero Marduk, who overcame 
Tiamat, the demon of chaos, is a cosmic principle of order; in Hindu cosmogony, 
the vital force produces the “One” of creation through asceticism (tapas tapyati). 
In the Nordic tradition the same idea is expressed through Odin’s sacrifice to 
the cosmic tree Yggdrasil, through which Odin draws out of the abyss the tran¬ 
scendent wisdom contained in the runes and puts it to good use*; also, in one 
specific version of this myth Odin, who is viewed as a king, through his sacrifice 
points the way that leads to Valhalla, namely, to the type of action that allows 

5. The original meaning of (he word “ceremony’* cannot be established for certain. The word comes from the 

root crco, which is identical to the Sanskrit root Ar, “to do.*' "to act," "to create"; it did not express a 
conventional celebration, but an authentically creative action. 

6, Bfhad-aninyiikn Upanisad, 1.4.11. 

1. In the Brhad~ t 1ninyaka Upanisad, ( [ .2.7-8) the primordial principle says: "Let my body become fit for 
sacrifice. Thanks to it I will acquire being/' This sacrifice (asvamedha) is related to the sun. 

8. Hnvamnl, 139. 


a person to partake of the heroic, aristocratic, and Uranian immortality/ 7 

According to its original meaning, the type of sacrifice to which I refer corre¬ 
sponds to either a similar action that generates a tt god” or “hero,” or to its repetition, 
which is connected to a sacrificial tradition centered on that particular god or hero; 
this repetition either renews the effective power of that god or reproduces it and 
develops it within the order of a given community. In the Egyptian tradition these 
meanings find a very important expression: according to a myth, Osiris is believed to 
be the one who taught mankind how to perform rites as well as the sacred ait of 
temple construction. Osiris is also the god of rites since he himself, first among all the 
gods, went through sacrifice and experienced “death.” His death and dismember¬ 
ment by Set are related to his “being the first to penetrate the unknown of the 
otherworld and to his becoming a being who knows the great secret,” 10 The myth is 
developed in the saga of Homs, son of Osiris, who resurrects his father. Horus finds 
the proper rites (khu) that give back to Osiris, who has gone into the otherworld or, 
strictly speaking, into the supernatural, the form that he previously had: 

Through death and rites, Osiris, the first among all beings, knew the 
mystery and a new liie: this science and this life were the privilege of 
beings who were considered divine. It is from this perspective that Osiris 
was thought to have initiated both men and gods into sacred rituals... . 

He had shown to beings who inhabit the heavens and earth how to be¬ 
come a god . 11 

From then on, the cult belonging to all divine beings or deified beings consisted 
in reenacting the mystery of Osiris. This was true first of all for the king; the sacrifi¬ 
cial mystery of Osiris was repeated not only in the ritual of the enthroning and in the 
solemn rite called sed repeated eveiy thirty years, but also in the daily cult, which 
aimed at renewing in the pharaoh the transcendent influence associated with his 
function. The king publicly acknowledged his kingship and paid homage to Osiris by 
“piecing him back together” and by ritually renewing his death and victory. The king 
was called “Horus who shapes the father (Osiris)” and also: “The giver of life, or he 
who through the rite makes divine life arise in a regal fashion, like the sun.” 12 The 

9. Ynglingnsiigu, 10. Somebody pointed out that the name of the Eddie Tree, Yggdrasil, “the roots of which 
cannot be found by any mortal being" ( Huvamal, 139-40), seems to denote the instrument employed to 
sacrifice Yggr, "the Terrible," which is one of Odin’s names. 

10. A. Morel, Royautt* pharaonique, 148. 

11. Ibid., 149. 

12. Ibid., 149: 153-61; 182-83. See also the expression of Ramses II: "I am a son who shapes the head of his 
own father and who gives life to the one who generated him/' (127). The king’s entrance into the throne 
room (paduat) corresponded to entering the otherworld (dual), namely, that of sacrificial death and tran¬ 
scendence. 


30 


31 



The ITlysiERy Of the Rite 


sovereign became “Horus” who resuscitated Osiris or was the resurrected Osiris 
himself. Similarly, in the Mysteries the initiates often took their name from the god 
who had founded those same Mysteries, since the initiation reproduces the same act 
that constitutes the essence of the god, thus determining an analogical similarity 
of natures; sometimes this similarity is figuratively described as ''incarnation” or 
“generation.” 

What has been said also applied to the rite in general, that is, to the rite dedi¬ 
cated to the “hero” or to the founding father to whom the traditional patrician family 
lines often attributed their nonmaterial origins as well as the principle of their rank 
and of their rights; it also applied to the rite dedicated to the cult of the founders of an 
institution, of a legislation, or of a city who were believed to be nonhuman beings. In 
these instances too it was believed that in the origins an action analogous to a sacri¬ 
fice took place that produced a supernatural quality that remained as a potential 
spiritual legacy within the stock as the “soul” of those institutions, laws, or founda¬ 
tions. In these cases, rites and various ceremonies helped to actualize and to nourish 
that original influence, which by virtue of its own nature, appeared to be a principle 
of well-being, good fortune, and “happiness.” 

Having clarified the meaning of a relevant body of traditional rites allows me to 
establish an important point. There are two elements within the traditions of those 
civilizations or of those castes characterized by a Uranian chrism. The first element 
is a materialistic and a naturalistic one; it consists of the transmission of something 
related to blood and race, namely, a vital force that originates in the subterranean 
world together with the elementary, collective, and ancestral influences. The second 
element is “from above,” and it is conditioned by the transmission and by the unin¬ 
terrupted performance of rites that contain the secret of a certain transformation and 
domination realized within the abovementioned vital substratum. The latter element 
is the higher legacy that confirms and develops the quality the “divine forefather” 
has either established ex novo or attracted from another world. This quality origi¬ 
nates the royal stock, the state, the city or the temple, and the caste, the gens or the 
patrician family according to the supernatural dimension that acts as a “form” shap¬ 
ing chaos. Both of these elements were found in the higher types of traditional civi¬ 
lizations. This is why the rites could appear to be “manifestations of the heavenly 
law,” 13 according to a Chinese saying. 

The unfolding of the ritual action par excellence in its most complete form (e.g., 
the Vedic sacrifice) reveals three distinct phases. First of all, there was a ritual and 
spiritual purification on the part of the person performing the sacrifice that put him in 
real contact with invisible forces and facilitated the possibility of his dominating 

13. Chung-ytmg, 27.6. 


them. What followed was an evocative process that produced a saturation of these 
energies either within the person performing the sacrifice, within the victim, or within 
both—or even within a third element that varied according to the structure of the rite. 
Finally, there was an action that induced a crisis (for example, the slaying of the 
victim) and that "actualized" the presence of the god out of the substance of the 
evoked influences. 14 With the exception of those cases in which the rite is aimed at 
creating a new entity destined to be the “soul” or the “genius” of a new tradition, a 
new city, or a new' temple (traditionally even the construction of cities and temples 
had a supernatural counterpart), 15 what took place was something similar to the ;*e- 
lensing and the reselling of hidden forces. In other words, what took place was the 
evocative renewal of the contact with the infernal forces that acted as the substratum 
ol a primordial deification, as well as with the violence that freed and elevated them 
to a higher form. This explains the danger believed to be associated with the repeti¬ 
tion of a traditional rite and also the reason why the person performing the sacrifice 
was called “virile hero.' "' A rite that fails or that goes wrong or that deviates in any 
way troin its original lonn, wounds and defaces a ''god”: it is sncnlcginm. Once a 
law has been altered, the seal ol a supernatural dominion is broken and dark, am¬ 
biguous, and dreadful forces are unleashed. Even neglecting a rite has a similar 
elfect: it lessens the presence of the “god” in the relationship with those who are 
guilty ol such neglect and it strengthens those energies that were tamed and re¬ 
strained in the “god” himself; in other words, it opens the doors to chaos. Conversely, 
a correctly performed and diligent sacrificial action was reputed to be the support 
that men and gods provide for each other in their mutual interest. 17 The fate awaiting 
those who no longer have any rite is the “infernal regions”; they fall from the super¬ 
natural order they had partaken of into the states of the lower nature. It has been said 
that only the sacrificial action does not create a ‘'bond.” 

Olympiodorus wane that the whole world is one great symbol, since it reflects 
invisible realities through sensible forms. Plutarch wrote: “Among the things that 

l-i. intriHiii/u vft* ath nuiiiiu (Rome. IMS t j, 3 2H! . 

IX Wiili regard to a new cue, it i* the formation of that /roArroc that m those civilizations of a higher 

■> pt' wa-, identified with the "royal fortune" (n#ij To consider such entities simply us "per- 

sonilu'd abstt act unis" is in adopt die perspective ol profane knowledge. In ancient ttgvpi she divine king 
presided over the hies related in the s i instruction of new temples; he even pet formed m a symbolical and 
ritual lashinn (he fust steps in the construction process To the vulgar constautum man-rials, he also 
added paid and sdvei which synitarii/e the divine element that he bestowed, by virtue of his presence and 
ol lib an , upon the visible construction as its souk In this regard he acted in the spirit of an "eternal deecr 
and in some inscriptions it is written: "The king permeated the ground that will become the a hoik* ol the 
gods." 

16 . Hit Veda, 1 . 40 , 3 . 

I 7. B/ug.a jttgfm. I H In another text it is said that the sacrifice is the food ol the gods and the "principle of 
their lives," SiKupiUha ffnlhmnn;\. tvl.2, 10. 


32 



The World of Tradition 

belong to a higher order there are secret connections and correspondences, just like 
in the order of natural phenomena: these connections cannot be recognized other 
than through experience, traditions and universal consensus.” 18 A characteristic ex¬ 
pression of Jewish esotericism is: 

Through the impulse from below there is a stirring above, and through 
the impulse from above there is a stirring higher up still. Thus by the 
impulse of the smoke [of sacrifice] from below the lamp is kindled above 
and when this is kindled all the other lamps are kindled and all the 
worlds are blessed from it. Thus by the impulse of the sacrifice is the 
mainstay of the world and the blessing of all worlds , 19 

This may be considered the general profession of faith of traditional civilizations. 
According to modem man, both causes and effects are relegated to the physical 
plane, framed within time and space. According to traditional man the physical plane 
merely contains effects; nothing takes place in this world that did not originate first 
in the next world or in the invisible dimension. In this sense too, it is possible to see 
how the rite takes hold and affects the development of all actions, destinies, and 
ways of traditional life. In traditional societies the action par excellence consisted in 
shaping events, relations, victories, and defense mechanisms through the rite, that is, 
in preparing causes in the invisible dimension. Any material action not connected to 
this supreme action was impaired by a radical contingency; the very soul of an indi¬ 
vidual was inadequately protected from the dark and elusive forces acting within 
human passions, thoughts, and inclinations and behind the scenes of nature and of 
history. 

All things considered, it is difficult to label as “fanciful” the fact that tradition¬ 
ally the performance of the rite was considered one of the fundamental principles in 
the hierarchical differentiation of people, and generally speaking, it was closely 
associated with every authority within the state, the gens, and the family itself. It is 
possible to reject the traditional world en bloc, but it is not possible to deny the 
intimate logical connection of all its parts, once its foundation has been properly 
understood. 


18, Plutarch, De sera num. vindicia, 28. 

19. Zohar, trims, H. Sperling and M. Simon (London, 1933), 2,244a. 


34 


On the Primordial Nature 
of the Patriciate 


T he Indo-Aryan civilization exemplifies one of Lhe most thorough applications of 
the foregoing principles. In this civilization, the brShmana caste was not at the 
top of the social hierarchy by virtue of its material strength or its wealth, or even of its 
para-ecclesiastical organization; only the sacrificial rite, which was its privilege, de¬ 
termined its higher status vis-a-vis other castes. By permeating those who performed 
them with some kind of dreadful and beneficial psychic power, the rite and the sacri¬ 
fice allowed the bnlhmana to partake of the same nature as the evoked powers; not 
only would this quality abide in that person forever, making him directly superior to 
and revered and feared by others, but it would also be transmitted to his descendants. 
Having entered into the bloodstream as some sort of transcendent legacy, this quality 
would become the characteristic feature of a race that is activated in individuals by 
lhe rite of initiation. 1 The dignity of a caste was determined both by the difficulty and 
by the usefulness of the functions it exercised. Because of the abovementioned pre¬ 
suppositions, in the world of Tradition nothing was cherished more than the spiritual 
influences that tire rite could activate through its necessitating action; nothing appeared 
as difficult as entering into a real and active relationship with the invisible forces that 
were ready to overcome the imprudent person who dared to confront them without pos¬ 
sessing the necessary qualifications and knowledge. For this reason the brahmana caste, 
despite the fact that it was scattered throughout India, could evince the respect of the 
masses and enjoy a prestige that no tyrant ever enjoyed, no matter how well aimed. 2 

In China as well as in Greece and ancient Rome, the patriciate was essen¬ 
tially characterized by the possession and by the practice of those rites that were 

1. The bnlhmana, who was compared to the sun. was often thought to be substantiated by a radiant energy or 
splendor (tejas) that he drew from his vital force through his “spiritual knowledge.'’ Sat a pat ha Brfihmana, 
13.2.6, 10. 

2. Concerning the foundation of die brShmapa 's authority, see The Laws of Mann 9.3 13-17. 


35 


The World of Tradition 


On the Primordial Hature of the Patriciate 


connected to the divine power emanating from the founder of a family. In China, only 
the patricians practiced the rites (yi-Ii), while the plebeians merely had customs (su). 
There is a Chinese saying: “The rites are not the legacy of ordinary people,” which 
corresponds to the famous saying of Appius Claudius: “Auspicia suntpatrum. "A Latin 
expression characterized the plebeians as gentem non habent: people who have no 
rites nor ancestors. This is why in ancient Rome the patricians viewed the plebeians’ 
lifestyle and sexual coupling as similar to that of wild animals (more ferarum). Thus, 
the supernatural element was the foundation ofthe idea of a traditional patriciate and 
of legitimate royalty: what constituted an ancient aristocrat was not merely a biological 
legacy or a racial selection, but rather a sacred tradition. In fact, even an animal may 
have biological and racial purity. After all, in the caste system the laws of blood, he¬ 
redity, and endogamic restrictions did not apply only to the brShmarm but to the other 
castes as well. It was not in this sense that the plebeian was said to lack ancestors: the 
true principle of the differentiation between patricians and plebeians was that the 
ancestors ofthe plebeian and ofthe slave were not “divine ancestors” (divi parentes) 
like the ancestors of the patrician stocks. No transcendent pua lity or “form” entrusted 
to a rigorous and secret ritual tradition was transmitted to them through the blood. The 
plebeians lacked that power through which the members of the aristocracy could di¬ 
rectly celebrate their own cults or be members of the priestly class (as was the case 
in the ancient classical world, in ancient Northern and Germanic races, in the Far East, 
and so on). The plebeians did not have the privilege of the second birth that charac¬ 
terized the a.rya (the noble) and the Manudhanmiffistra* does not hesitate to say that 
even an Srya is not superior to the sudra until he has been bom again. The plebeians 
were not purified by any of the three heavenly fires that in ancient Iran were believed 
to act as the occult souls of the three higher castes in the empire. The plebeians also 
lacked the "solar" element that in ancient Peru characterized the race of the Incas, Tire 
plebeians’ promiscuity had no limits; they had no true cult of their own, and in a higher 
sense they had no founding father (patrem ciere non possunt). 3 4 * Therefore the plebe¬ 
ians’ religion could not help but have a collective and chthonic character. In India their 
religion was characterized by frenzied and ecstatic forms more or less connected to 
the substratum of pre-Aryan races. In the Mediterranean civilizations, the plebeians' 
religion was chaiacterized by the cult of the mothers and by subterranean forces in¬ 
stead of the luminous forms of the heroic and Olympian tradition. The plebeians, who 
in ancient Rome were called “children of the Earth," had a religious devotion to the 
feminine deities of the earth. Even in China, the official aristocratic religion stood in 

3. LawsofManu,2.y); 103: 157-58; 172. 

4. In the mythical account ot the establishment of the castes as it was handed clown by the hrUhmnnu, while 

to each of the three higher castes corresponds a group of deities, this is not the case ofthe MiIni. who do 

not have any god of their own to whom they may pray and offer sacrifices. 


contrast with the practices of those who were often called “obsessed” (ling-pao), and 
with the popular cults of a Mongolian and shamanic type. 

We find the supernatural conception of the aristocracy also in ancient Teutonic 
traditions, not only because in these traditions every leader was at the same time the 
high priest of his people and of his lands, but also because claiming as an ancestor a 
divine being was enough to separate a family from all the others; a king was then cho¬ 
sen exclusively from among the members of these privileged families. This is why 
the king enjoyed a different dignity from that enjoyed, for instance, by a military leader 
(dux or heiitzogo) who was occasionally appointed in military situations on the basis 
of his recognized individual talents. It seems that ancient Norwegian kings celebrated 
tlie rites by themselves, without the help of the priestly class. Even among the so-called 
primitive populations those who had not been initiated were looked down upon by 
their own people and excluded from all the military and political privileges of their 
clan. Before undergoing rites that were destined to transform one’s innermost nature 
and that were often associated with hard trials and a with a period of isolation, a per¬ 
son was not considered to be a true man but was rather seen as belonging to the same 
class as women, children, and animals. An individual became a member of the group 
of true men who control the community only through the new life awakened in him 
by initiation, almost as if he partook of a “mystery” or joined an order.* Once an indi¬ 
vidual partakes of this new life, which is almost “unrelated to the old one,” he receives 
a new name, a new language, and new attributions. Thus, authors such as H. Schurtz 
have rightfully seen in this the germ of true political unity; this insight corroborates 
what I have said before concerning the plane proper to any traditional state, which is 
different from the plane typical of any unity built on merely naturalistic premises. 
These “virile groups” (in Gentian, Miinnerbunde) to which one is admitted after a re¬ 
generation that truly confers manhood and differentiates a person from all other mem¬ 
bers of the community, en joy power (imperium) and an undisputed prestige. 6 

Only in recent times has aristocracy, like royalty, taken on a mere secular and 
political character. In the beginning, aristocracy and royalty were based on charac¬ 
ter, race, honor, valor, and faithfulness, on noblesse d’epee and on noblesse de coeur. 
In later times a plebeian view of the aristocracy arose that denied even the privi¬ 
leges of blood and tradition. 

A typical example ofthe latter view is the so-callecl aristocracy of culture, or trie 

3. Hutton Webster, Primitive Secret Societies (Italian trims., Bologna, 1921). 

6. Concerning virility in an eminent and not naturalistic sense, we may refer to the Latin term mas opposed 
to homo. G. B. Vico (The New Science, 3.41) had already remarked that this term implied a special 
dignity, since it designated not only a man to he married with a patrician woman, but also the nobility, the 
magistrates (duumviri, decemviri), the priests (quindiccmviri, vigintiviri), judges (cemern W/p. because 
“the term Wrindicated wisdom, priesthood and kingship, as I have previously demonstrated that it formed 
one thing in the person of the first fathers in the state constituted by families." 


36 


37 


The World of Traditioh 


On THE PriiIIORDIAL riflTURE OF THE PATRICIATE 


aristocracy of intellectuals that arose as a by-product of bourgeois civilization. Dur¬ 
ing a census taken in the reign of Frederick the Great, the head of an ancient German 
noble family humorously replied, “Analphabet wegen des hohen Adels,” in refer¬ 
ence to the ancient notion of the British lords who were considered “experienced in 
the law and learned, even though they may not know how to read.” The truth is that 
in the context of a normal hierarchical view, the principle that determined the pre¬ 
cise ontological and essential differences between people and was at the basis of the 
notion of aristocracy and of its privileges was never “intellectuality” but rather “spiri¬ 
tuality.” The tradition was preserved, though in an attenuated form, up to the time of 
the knightly nobility where it was embodied in a somewhat ascetical and sacral 
aspect in the great medieval orders. At that point the nobility already had its main 
reference point in the sacred, not in but outside itself and in a separate class, namely, 
the clergy, although the clergy represented a spirituality that was still a far cry from 
the spirituality of the primordial elites. 

The ritual and sacral element was the foundation of the authority of both the 
higher castes and of the father in the ancient patrician family. In Western Aryan 
societies such as Greece and Rome, the pater familia e originally enjoyed a status 
similar to that of the priest-king. The term pater was synonymous with king (hence 
the words rex, aval;, fia<jitevg)\ it conveyed the idea of a spiritual authority as well 
as that of power and majestic dignity. According to some views with which I totally 
concur, the state is an application on a larger scale of the same principle that in the 
beginning constituted the patrician family. Therefore the pater, though he was the 
military leader and the lord of justice of his relatives and slaves, in primis et ante 
omnia was the person entrusted with performing those traditional rites and sacrifices 
proper to every family, the rites and sacrifices that constituted its nonhuman legacy. 

This legacy, which emanated from the founding father, was represented by fire 
(for example, the thirty fires of the thirty families surrounding the central fire of 
Vesta, in ancient Rome). This fire, which was fed with special substances and lit 
according to specific rituals and secret norms, was supposed to be kept burning at all 
times by every family as the living and tangible witness of its divine legacy. The 
father was the virile priest in charge of tending to the sacred family fire, but he was 
also one who must have appeared like a “hero” to his children, relatives, and ser¬ 
vants; or like the natural mediator of every efficacious relationship with the super¬ 
natural; or like the supreme vivifier of the mystical force of the ritual, which was 
present in the substance of fire; or like the incarnation of “order,” as Agni was to the 
Indo-Aryans; or like the principle that “brings the gods to us”; or like “the firstborn 
from order”; or like “the son of strength”; 7 or like “he who leads us away from this 

7. Rg Veda , 1.1.7-8; 1.13.1; 10.5.7; 8.3.8. 


world, to higher dimensions, into the world of the light action.” 8 The pater’ s main 
responsibility was to prevent the “fire from going out” so that it might continue to 
reproduce, perpetuate, and nourish the mystical victory of the ancestor; 17 this respon¬ 
sibility to the fire was the manifestation of the “regal” component of his family, with 
the pa ter being the “lord of the spear and of the sacrifice.” In this way the pater really 
constituted the center of the family; the entire rigorous constitution of traditional 
paternal rights flowed from this center as a natural consequence, and it subsisted 
even when the awareness of its primordial foundation was lost. In ancient Rome, 
anyone who like the pa ter had the ius quiritium (the right to the bear the lance and to 
perform sacrifices), also had the right to own land; his privileges could never be 
abrogated. He spoke on behalf of the gods and on account of power. Just like the 
gods, he expressed himself through symbols and signs. He was immaterial. Origi¬ 
nally, it was not possible (nulla auctoritas) to prosecute a patrician legally, since he 
was regarded as a minister of the gods, just like the king in recent times. If the 
patrician committed a crime in his mundus , the Curia would only declare that he did 
something wicked (improbe factum). His rights over his relatives were absolute: ius 
vitae necisque. His superhuman character made it natural for him to sell and even to 
put to death his own children, at his own discretion. 10 It was in this spirit that die 
articulations of what Vico rightly called “natural heroic rights” or “divine rights of 
heroic people” were formulated. 

According to a patrician tradition the rite, which corresponded to a “Uranian” 
component, enjoyed primacy over other elements of the same tradition that were 
related to nature; this can be established from several aspects of the ancient Greco- 
Roman laws. It has rightfully been said that: 

In antiquity what united the members of a family was something more 
powerful than birth, feelings and physical strength: it was the cult of the 
hearth and of the ancestors. This cult shaped the family into a united 
body, both in this world and in the next. The ancient family was more a 
religious than a natural association." 

8. Atharva Veda 6.120.1. The expression refers to giirhapatya-agni which, among the three fires, is that of 
the paler or head of the household. 

9. ’The father is the household’s fire." Laws ofMnnu, 2.23 I. To keep fueling the sacred fire is the duty of the 

dvtja. the twice-born, who constitute the three higher castes (2.108). It is not possible now io elaborate 
beyond this brief reference to the traditional cult of fire. Later on t will discuss the role that men anc! 
women played in the cult of the fire, in the family and in social life. 

10. Concerning the abovementioned expressions, see M. Michelet, Histoirc de In rSpublique romainc (Paiis, 
1843), 1.138. 144—46. Similar elements are even found in more recent traditions. The British lords in the 
beginning were considered to be demigods and on the same footing with the king. According to a law 
promulgated by Edward I, they enjoyed the privilege of simple homicide. 

U, F, de Coulanges, Cit6 antique, 105. 


38 


39 




The World of TRflDinon 


On THE PRimORDIfll riniURE OF THE PATRICIATE 


The common ritual constituted the true bond of the family’s unity and often even of 
the gens itself. If an outsider was allowed to participate in the common rite, he thereby 
became an adoptive son who enjoyed those privileges that could also be taken away 
from a biological son guilty of neglecting the rite of his family, or from a son who 
was interdicted from participating in it. This obviously meant that according to the 
traditional idea, rite rather than blood had the power to unite or to differentiate 
people. 12 In India, Greece, and Rome, a woman had to mystically join her future 
husband’s family or gens through the rite; the bride, before being a man’s bride, was 
the bride of Agni or the mystical fire. Those who were allowed to participate in the 
cult pi oper of a patrician stock were thereby allowed to enjoy an ennobling mystical 
participation that conferred upon them some of the privileges of that particular stock, 
while at the same time they committed their future offspring to it. Consequently, it is 
possible to understand the sacred aspect of the feudal principle as it previously 
emerged in ancient Egypt, since through the mystical “gift of life” emanating from 
him, the king gathered around himself a body of faithful subjects who were elevated 
to the priestly dignity. Analogous ideas can be found in Peru among the Incas, the 
Children of the Sun,” and to a certain extent, even among the Japanese feudal 
lability. 

In India one finds the idea—which should be reduced to the doctrine of the 
sacrifices in general—of a family line of male descendants (primogeniture) that is 
trictly related to the problem of immortality. The firstborn—who alone has the right 
° invoke Indra, the heavenly warrior god—is seen as the one whose birth frees the 
father of his debt to the ancestors; thus, it is said that the firstborn “frees” or “saves” 
(tidycite) the ancestors in the world beyond. The firstborn, standing on the “battle¬ 
field represented by this earthly existence, confirms and continues the line of influ¬ 
ence that constitutes the ancestors substance and that is carried on in the blood¬ 
stream as a purifying fire. It is significant that the firstborn is believed to have been 
generated in order to fulfill a duty to this ritual commitment that is not affected by 
human feelings or ties. 

It is not impossible, therefore, that in some cases a family derived by adaptation 
from a superior and purely spiritual type of unity found in older times. For instance, 
Lao-tzu 11 hinted that the family arose at the end of a relationship of direct participa¬ 
tion, through blood, with the original spiritual principle. A similar idea still echoes as 

12. In Rome tlicre were two types of marriage, one related to the Uuhonic and the other to the Uranian 
component of Roman civilization. The lirst type was a secular and practical marriage, in which the woman 
was considered mere properly to be transferred to the nuinum viri ; the second type was a ritual and sacred 
marriage, a contarreatio, a sacrament or sacred union (hicrognmos). The Hellenistic equivalent of the 
confarrcntio was the eggineois; the sacral element that abided in the agape was considered to be so 
important that without it the validity of the marriage could be challenged. 

13. Tao it Clung, 18. 


a residue in the priority acknowledged by several traditions of spiritual paternity 
over natural paternity, or of a “second birth” versus natural birth. In ancient Rome, 
for instance, we could refer to the inner aspect of the dignity conferred at the time of 
adoption, which was understood as an immaterial and supernatural filiation that was 
believed to take place under the aegis of “Olympian” deities; at one point in time 
adoption was also chosen as the basis for the continuation of the imperial function. 
According to an ancient Hindu text: 

That his mother and father produced him through mutual desire and he 
was born in the womb, he should regard as his mere coming into exist¬ 
ence. But the birth that a teacher produces for him ... is real, free from 
old age and free from death . 14 

In this way natural relationships not only are secondary, but they may also be re¬ 
versed; thus according to the same text, “the brilhmanu who brings about the Vedic 
birth of an older person and who teaches him his own duties becomes his father, 
according to law, even if he is himself a child.” 15 Wherever the law of patria potestas 
was considered from a social and juridical point of view to be absolute and almost 
superhuman, such a law could enjoy this spiritual character only if it had (or if it 
originally had) such a justification in the order of spiritual paternity, and also if it was 
related to blood ties as the “soul” is related to the “body” within the organic unity of 
the family stock. I will not dwell further on these concepts; however, it is noteworthy 
that a body of ancient beliefs also postulates the idea of a unity that is not merely 
biological but psychospiritual as well. Thus the guilt of a family member was be¬ 
lieved to affect the entire family; 16 also, according to this idea, a family member may 
redeem another or carry out an act of vengeance on behalf of another, and so on. 

In all of these aspects one finds repeated confirmation of the view according to 
which traditional institutions were ordered “from above” and were not based on 
nature but on sacred legacies and on spiritual actions that bind, free, and “shape” 
nature. In the divine dimension what counts is the blood (deoi ovvaipoi) and the 
family (Geoi eyyeveig). The state, the community, the family, bourgeois feelings, 
duties in the modem (profane, human, and social) sense of the word—all these are 
human “fabrications,” things entirely made up and existing outside the realm of tra¬ 
ditional reality, in the world of shadows. The light of Tradition did not know any oi 
these things. 


14. La \vs of Mann, 2.147-48. 

15. Laws of Manu, 2.150. 

16. Dcut. 5:7. 


40 


41 




Spiritual Vntiuiy 


7 


Spiritual Virility 


S o far I have discussed the roles that the Sacred, the gods, the priestly class, and 
the rites played in traditional societies. In the world of Tradition, these things 
hardly correspond to categories typical of the domain of “religion" in the current 
sense of the word, based as it is on the notion of deities conceived as self-sufficient 
beings and the notion of God as a personal being who providentially rules the uni¬ 
verse. Moreover, the cult is essentially characterized by an affective disposition and 
by a sentimental and devotional relationship of the “believer 1 ' to this Supreme Being 
or deities. In this type of relationship the moral law plays a fundamental role. 

One would look in vain for “religion” in the original forms of the world of Tradi¬ 
tion. There are civilizations that never named their gods or attempted to portray them— 
at least this is what is said about tine ancient Pelasgians. The Romans themselves, for 
almost two centuries, did not portray their deities; at most, they represented them with 
a symbolical object. What characterizes the primordial times is not “animism" (the 
idea that an “anima” is the foundation of the general representation of lire divine and 
of the various forces at work in the universe) but rather the idea or perception of pure 
powers, 1 3 adequately represented by the Roman view of the numen. The numen, un¬ 
like the notion of deus (as it later came to be understood), is not a being or a person, 
but a sheer power that is capable of producing effects, of acting, and of manifesting 
itself. The sense of the real presence of such powers, or niimina, as something simul¬ 
taneously transcendent and yet immanent, marvelous yet fearful, constituted the sub¬ 
stance of the original experience of the “sacred " : A well-known saying of Servius 
emphasizes that in the origins, “religion" consisted in nothing else but experience .■ 
Even though moie conditioned points of view were not excluded from exotericism 
(those tiaditional forms reserved for the common people), “inner doctrines" were 

1. G. F. Moore, Origin and Growth of Religion (London, 1921). 

2. R, Otto (The holy) has employed the term “numinous” (from numen) to designate the content of the 
experience of the sacred. 

3. “'Maiores enim expugnando religionem lotvm in experiemia collocabunt." Adgcorgicas. 3.4256 


characterized by the teaching that the personal forms of deities, variously objectified, 
are only symbols of superrational and superhuman ways of being. As I have said, the 
center consisted in the real and living presence of these states within an elite, or in 
the ideal of their realization through what in Tibet is called the “direct path," and which 
generally corresponds to initiation conceived as an ontological change of nature. The 
saying from the Upanisads that best represents the traditional “inner doctrine" is: “So 
whoever worships another divinity than his Self, thinking: ‘He is one and I another, 5 
he knows not. He is like a sacrificial animal for the gods." 4 

With regard to the rite there was nothing “religious" about it and little or no 
devout pathos in those who performed it. The rite was rather a “divine technique," a 
determining action upon invisible forces and inner states similar in spirit to what 
today is obtained through physical forces and states of matter. The priest was simply 
a person who, by virtue of his qualification and the virtus intrinsic to the rite itself, 
was capable of producing results through this technique. “Religion” was the equiva¬ 
lent of the indigitamenta of the ancient Roman world, namely, of the body of formu¬ 
lations used with different numina. Thus it is easy to see that prayers, fears, hopes, 
and other feelings displayed before what has the character of numen had as little 
meaning and effect upon it as if one of our contemporaries were to employ prayers 
when confronting a machine. Instead, what was at stake was to be able to understand 
such relationships so that once a cause was established through a correctly performed 
rite, a necessary and constant effect would ensue on the plane of “powers" and invis¬ 
ible forces and states of being. Thus, the law of action reigned supreme. But the law 
of action is also the law of freedom; no bond can be spiritually imposed on beings 
who neither hope nor fear, but rather act. 

IT us in the older Indo-Aryan view of the world only the brahmana caste, con¬ 
sisting as it did of superior natures, could tower over everybody else since it ruled 
over the power of the rite, or of Brahman, understood in this context as the vital and 
primordial principle. The “gods" themselves, when they are not personifications of 
the ritual action (that is, beings who are actualized or renewed by this action), are 
spiritual forces that bow before this casted According to the Far Eastern tradition, the 
person who has authority also enjoys the dignity of a “third power between Heaven 
and Earth." 6 In ancient Egypt, even the “great gods" could be threatened with de¬ 
struction by priests who knew special sacred incantations. 7 “Kemotef” (“his mother's 

4. Byhad-Sninyuku Upanisad 1.4.10. 

5. Somebody re marked that in the Hindu tradition the religious deed par excellence appears to have been 
thought of in terms of a magical procedure or of a quasi-mechanical operation, the good or bad outcome of 
which depended entirely on the person engaging in it; in this context, morality had no role to play. 

6. Cluing-yung, 24.1; 23.1; 31.1, 3, 4. 

7. Porphyry did not fail to contrast this kind of attitude toward the divine with the attitude of fearful religious 
worship that emerged in some features of the Greco-Rom an cult. Episnihi Aneho , 29. 


42 


43 





The World of Trrditioii 

bull”) was a title of the Egyptian king, emphasizing that as a man, the king possesses 
the primordial substance; he affects the divine more than being affected by it. One of 
the formulations recited by the Egyptian kings before the performance of the rites 
was: “O gods, you are safe if I am safe; your doubles are safe if my double is at the 
head of all living doubles; everybody lives if I live.Formulations of glory, power, 
and total identification are recited by the soul ‘'rendered like Osiris” in the course of 
its trials; these trials in turn can be assimilated to various degrees of solar initia¬ 
tion. Similar traditions are perpetuated wherever in Alexandrian literature mention 
is made of the “holy race of people without kings,” a race "autonomous and immate¬ 
rial” that “acts without being acted upon.”” This race is believed to be endowed with 
a “sacred science centuries old” that is proper to “die lords of the spirit and of the 
temple,” and communicated only to kings, princes, and priests; this science is related 
to the rituals of the pharaohs and later on it came to be known in the Western world 
as Ars Regia. I() 

In the higher forms of the luminous Aryan spirituality, whether in Greece, an¬ 
cient Rome, or the Far East, the role played by doctrine was minimal: only the rituals 
were mandatory and absolutely necessary. Orthodoxy was defined through rituals 
and practices and not through dogmas and theories. Sacrilege and impiety (ao£fie,ia) 
did not consist in “not believing” but rather in neglecting rites. This does not amount 
to “formalism”—as modem historians, who are more or less influenced by a Protes¬ 
tant mentality, would have us believe—but rather to the pure law of spiritual action. 
In the Doric-Achaean ritual, the relationship with the divine was not based on feel¬ 
ings but on an attitude characterized by do ut dcs.' ] Even the gods presiding over 
ii n era Is were not treated very “religiously”; they did not love men, nor were they 
oved by them in return. The reason behind their cult was to propitiate them and to 
prevent them from exercising an unfavorable action. The expintio itself originally 
had the character of an objective operation, such as the medical procedure for an 


8. This explains why the first generation of Egyptologists was led hy devotional religion to recognize in the 
features of pharaonic regality those of the Antichrist or of the princeps huius mundi. 

9. This obviously corresponds to the principle of "acting without acting," winch according to the Taoist 
tradition is "Heaven’s Was "; accordingly, "iliose without kings" correspond to those whom l.ao-tz.u called 
"skillful masters" of the Tao (Tao/c 1 Ching, IS) and to the Iranian "men of the primordial law." 

10. Sec J. Evola. The Hermetic Tradition, trails. E. E. Rehmus (Rochester, Vi.. 1004). Even though the king 
may be called son o! the Sun, or son of Heaven this does not contradict the abovementioned views, 
since such concepts do not c\ okc creationist and duali.-aic concepts. Rather, these views convey the idea 
of ti descent that is the continuation of the same one influence, spirit or emanation. Agrippa remarked 
(De occult n philosopher, 3.36) that it is like "the uni vocal generation in which the son is similar to the 
father in all rega rds. and having been genera ted a svording to the human species, he is the same as (he one 
who generated him," 

11. J. E. Harrison, Prolegomena to the Study of the Greek Religion (Cambridge, 1903), 162. 


Spiritual Virile 

infection, without resembling either a punishment or an act of repentance on the part 
of a soul. The formulations employed by every patrician family and by every ancient 
city in their relationship with the forces controlling their destinies, had been previ¬ 
ously employed by their divine forefathers to overcome spiritual forces (numina). 
Thus, these formulations were merely the legacy of a mystical domain; they were 
not the effusion of feelings but a supematurally efficacious weapon, provided that 
not a single technique was changed in the course of the rite. 12 

Wherever the traditional principle was applied in its entirety it is possible to 
find, in its hierarchical differentiations, a transcendent virility that finds its best 
symbolical expression in the synthesis of the two attributes of the Roman patrician 
class, namely, the lance and the rite. There one also finds beings who are reges 
sacrorum, innerly free, and often consecrated by Olympian immortality. With regard 
to invisible and divine forces these beings exercise the same function of centrality 
and the same role that leaders exercise among human beings. A very long down¬ 
ward path or degenerated process unwinds from this “peak” to what is currently and 
commonly considered “religion” and “priesthood.” 

The world of “animism” represents a fall from and an attenuation of the world 
perceived under the species of “powers” and of numina. This attenuation and degen¬ 
eration was destined to increase with the shift from a world in which “souls” were 
inherent in things and in the elements to a world in which the gods were conceived as 
persons in an objective sense rather than as figurative allusions to nonhuman states, 
forces, and possibilities. When the efficacy of the rite disappeared, man was moti¬ 
vated to give a mythological individuality to those forces with which he had previ¬ 
ously dealt according to simple relationships of technique or which, at most, he had 
conceived under the species of symbols. Later on man conceived these forces in his 
own image, thus limiting human possibilities; he saw in them personal beings whe 
were more powerful than he was, and who were to be addressed with humility, faith, 
hope, and fear, not only to receive protection and success, but also liberation and 
stilus (in its double meaning of health and salvation). The hyperrealistic world thal 
was substantiated with pure and sheer action was replaced with a subreal and con¬ 
fused world of emotions, imagination, hopes, and fears; this world became increas¬ 
ingly “human” and powerless as it followed various stages of the general involution 
and alteration of the primordial tradition. 

Only vis-a-vis this decadence is it possible to distinguish the regal and the priestly 
functions. Even when a priestly class ruled without departing from the pure tradi- 


12. Cicero, De hnruspicinu responsio, 11.23; Arnobius, Adversus mitiones (The Ca.se Aj^ainsL the Ragans), 
4.3). 


44 


45 




The World of Tradition 

tional spirit, as in the case of ancient India, it had a much more “magical” and regal 
rather than religious character, in the usual sense of the word “religious.” 

When I say magical,” I do not mean what today the majority of people think 
when they hear the term “magic, 55 which is almost always discredited by prejudices 
and counterfeits. Nor do I refer to the meaning the term acquires when referred to 
the sui generis empirical science typical of antiquity, which was rather limited in its 
scope and effects. Magic in this context designates a special attitude toward spiritual 
reality itself, an attitude of centrality that is closely related to regal tradition and 
initiation. 

Secondly, it does not make sense to emphasize the relationship between the 
magical attitude, the pure ritual, the impersonal, direct, and “numinous” perception 
of the divine and the way of life of savage tribes, which according to the Judeo- 
Christian menta Iity are still unaware of “true religiosity.” In most cases, savage tribes 
should not be considered as precivilized states of mankind, but rather as extremely 
degenerated forms of remnants of very ancient races and civilizations. Even though 
the abovementioned particulars are found among savage tribes and are expressed in 
materialistic, dark, and shamanic forms, this should not prevent us from recognizing 
the meaning and the importance they assume once they are brought back to their 
tiue oiigins. Likewise, “magic 51 should not be understood on Lhe basis of those wretched 
and degenerated remnants, but rather on the basis of the forms in which it was pre¬ 
served in an active, luminous, and conscious way. These forms coincide with what I 
have called the “spiritual virility” of the world of Tradition. It does not come as a 
surprise that most noted modem “historians of religion” have no idea whatsoever 
about this concept; the confusions and the prejudices found in their highly docu¬ 
mented works are most unfortunate. 


46 


8 



A t this point it is necessary to discuss the connection between the order of ideas 
I have outlined so far and the problem of one’s destiny in the afterlife. In this 
context too, reference should be made to teachings that have almost entirely been 
lost in recent times. 

The belief that everybody’s soul is immortal is rather odd; very little evidence 
ol it can be found in the world of Tradition. In Tradition, a distinction was made 
between true immortality, which corresponded to participation in the Olympian na¬ 
ture of a god, and mere survival; also, various forms of possible survival came into 
play and the problem of the postmortem condition of each individual was analyzed, 
always taking into consideration the various elements present in the human aggre¬ 
gate, since man was far from being reduced to the simple binomial “soul-body.” 

What continuously emerges in various forms in ancient traditions is the teaching 
that in man, in addition to the physical body, there are essentially three entities or 
principles, each endowed with its own character and destiny. The first principle cor¬ 
responds to the conscious “I” typical of the waking state, which arose with the body 
and was formed in parallel with its biological development; this is the ordinary per¬ 
sonality. The second principle was called “demon,” “manes, ” “Jar, "and even “double.” 
The third and last principle corresponds to what proceeds from the first entity after- 
death; for most people, it is the “shadow.” 

As long as a person belongs to “nature,” the ultimate foundation of a human 
being is the daemon or “demon,” (SatfMOV in Greek); in this context the term does 
not have the evil connotation Christianity bestowed upon it. When man is considered 
from a naturalistic point of view, the demon, could be defined as the deep force that 
originally produced consciousness in the finite form that is the body in which it lives 
during its residence in the visible world. This force eventually remains “behind” the 
individual, in the preconscious and in the subconscious dimensions, as the founda¬ 
tion of organic processes and subtle relations with the environment, other beings, 


47 



The World of Traditioh 


The Two Paths id the Afterlife 


and with past and future destiny; these relations usually elude any direct perception. 

[n this regard, in many traditions the demon corresponds to the so-called double, 
which is perhaps a reference to the soul of the soul or the body itself; this “double” 
has also often been closely associated with the primordial ancestor or with the totem 
conceived as the soul and the unitary life that generated a stock, a family, a gens, or 
a tribe, and therefore it has a broader sense than the one given to it by some schools 
of contemporary ethnology. The single individuals of a group appear as various in¬ 
carnations or emanations of this demon or totem, which is the “spirit” pulsating in 
their blood; they live in it and it lives in them, though transcending them, just as the 
matrix transcends the particular forms it produces out of its own substance. In the 
Hindu tradition the demon corresponds to that principle of man’s inner being called 
lihga-sanra. The word lingn contains the idea of a generating power; hence, the 
possible derivation of genius from genere , which means to act in the sense of beget¬ 
ting; and hence, the Roman and Greek belief that the genius or /ar (demon) is the 
same procreating force without which a family would become extinct. It is also very 
significant that totems have often been associated with the “souls” of selected ani¬ 
mal species, and that especially the snake, essentially a telluric animal, has been 
associated in the classical world with the idea of demon or of genius. These two 
instances bear witness to the fact that in its immediacy this force is essentially 
subpersonal, and belongs to nature and to the infernal world. Thus, according to the 
symbolism of the Roman tradition, the seat of the hires is underground; they are in 
the custody of a female principle, Mania, who is the Mater Larum. 

According to esoteric teachings, at the death of the body an ordinary person 
usually loses his or her personality, which was an illusory thing even while that 
person was alive. The person is then reduced to a shadow that is itself destined to be 
dissolved after a more or less lengthy period culminating in what was called “the 
second death.” 1 The essential vital principles of the deceased return to the totem, 
which is a primordial, perennial, and inexhaustible matter; life will again proceed 
from this matter and assume other individual forms, all of which are subject to the 
same destiny. This is the reason why totems, manes, lares, or penates (the gods of 

1. The Egyptian tradition rcl'cnred to those who are damned in the afterlife judgment as “twice dead. They 
become the victims of the infernal monster A mam ('The Devourer") or Am-mii (“the Corpse hater T 
The Egyptian Book of the Dead contains formulations designed to help a person “to elude the second 
death in the nest world." "Judgment" is just an allegory. It K rather an impersonal and objective prom 
as the symbol of the scale weighing the “hearts'' of the deceased seems to suggest, mice nothing could 
prevent a scale from being weighed down by the greater weight. As tar as the "sentencing" is concerned, 
it also presupposes the inability to realize some possibilities of immortality granted in the postmortem: 
these possibilities arc alluded to by some traditional teachings, from Egypt to Tibet, arid described in their 
respective “Books of the Dead.” Also, see the Aztec traditions concerning the “trials" undergone by the 
deceased and the magical formulas employed by them. 


the Roman people, “to whom we owe the breath within us and by whom we possess 
our bodies and our power of thought” 2 ) were identified with the dead; the cult of the 
ancestors, the demons, and the invisible generating force that is present in every¬ 
body was often confused with the cult of the dead. The “souls” of the deceased 
continued to exist in the dii manes into whom they were dissolved, but also in those 
forces of the stock, the race, or the family in which the life of these dii manes was 
manifested and perpetuated. 

d his teaching concerns the naturalistic order. There is, however, a second teaching 
relating to a higher order and a different, more privileged, aristocratic, and sacred 
solution to the problem of survival after death. It is possible to establish a connection 
here with the ideas expressed above concerning those ancestors who, through their 
“victory,” bestowed a sacred legacy upon the ensuing patrician generations that re¬ 
enact and renew the rite. 

The “heroes” or demigods to whom the higher castes and the noble families of 
traditional antiquity traced their lineage were beings who at death (unlike most people 
or unlike those who had been defeated in the trials of the afterlife) did not emanate 
a “shadow” or the larva of an ego that was eventually destined to die anyway; in¬ 
stead, they were beings who had achieved the self-subsistent, transcendent, and in¬ 
corruptible life of a “god.” They were those who “had overcome the second death.” 
This was possible because they had more or less directly imposed upon their own 
vital force that change of nature I mentioned before when talking about the transcen¬ 
dent meaning of “sacrifice.” Ancient Egyptian traditions clearly articulated the task 
of creating out of the ka (another name for the “double” or the “demon”) some kind 
of new incorruptible body (sahu) that was supposed to replace the physical body and 
“stand on its own feet” in the invisible dimension. In other traditions it is possible to 
find the identical concept under the names of “immortal body,” “body of glory,” or 
“resurrection body.” Therefore, if in their traditions the Greeks of Homer’s time (as 
in the first Aryan period when the Vedas were written) did not contemplate the 
survival of the soul alone, but instead, believed the survivors (those who had been 
“kidnapped” or “made invisible” by the gods and who had settled in the “island of 
the blessed,” where there is no death) retained soul and body in an indissoluble 
unity, this should not be understood as a coarse materialistic representation, as many 
historians of religion today are inclined to believe, but as the symbolic expression of 
the idea of an “immortal body” and the condition for immortality; this idea enjoyed 
its classical formulation in Far Eastern esotericism, and more specifically, in opera¬ 
tive Taoism. The Egyptian sahu, created by the rite, thanks to which the deceased 
can go on to live in the company of solar gods, indicates a body that has achieved a 

2. Macrobiux. Sxtumulin, 3.4. 


48 


49 





The World of Trhditiod 


The Two Phths id the Rfterlife 


high degree of knowledge, power, and glory and that has thus become everlasting 
and incorruptible. This body is referred to in the following formulation: “Your soul 
lives, your body geminates eternally at Ra’s command without any diminution or 
defect, just like Ra’s.” In this context the attainment of immortality or the victory 
over adverse powers of dissolution is related to wholeness, namely, to the insepara¬ 
bility of the soul from the body—better yet, from a body that does not undergo decay. 
There is a very suggestive Vedic formula: “Leaving behind every fault, go back 
home. Filled with splendor, be reunited with your body.” 3 The Christian dogma of 
the “resurrection of the flesh” that will take place on Judgment Day is the last echo 
of this idea, which can be traced back to prehistoric times. 4 5 

In these instances death did not represent an end but a fulfillment. It was a 
triumphal death bestowing immortality and was the reason why in some Hellenic 
traditions the deceased was called “hero” and dying was called “generating demi¬ 
gods (rjpcoayiveaGai); or why the deceased was portrayed wearing a crown (often 
put on his head by the goddesses of victoiy) made with the same myrtle that identi¬ 
fied those who were going to be initiated into the Eleusinian Mysteries; or why in the 
Catholic liturgical language the day of death is called dies natalis (day of birth); or 
why in Egypt the tombs of the deceased who had been dedicated to Osiris were 
called “houses of immortality,” and the afterlife was conceived as “the land of tri¬ 
umph ; or why in ancient Rome the emperor’s “demon” was worshiped as divine, 
and why the kings, legislators, victorious generals, and founders of those institutions 
or traditions that were believed to involve an action and a conquest beyond nature 
were worshiped as heroes, demigods, gods, and avatars of different deities. The 
sacred foundation of the authority the elders enjoyed in several ancient civilizations 
lies in similar ideas. People saw in the elders, who were closer to death, the manifes¬ 
tation of the divine force that was thought to achieve its full liberation at death. 3 

Thus, as lar as the destiny of the soul after death is concerned, there are two 
opposite paths. The first is the “path of the gods,” also known as the “solar path” or 
Zeus’s path, which leads to the bright dwelling of the immortals. This dwelling was 
variously represented as a height, heaven, or an island, from the Nordic Valhalla 
and Asgard to the Aztec-Inca “House of the Sun” that was reserved for kings, he- 
loes, and nobles. The other path is that trodden by those who do not survive in a real 
way, and who slowly yet inexorably dissolve back into their original stocks, into the 

3. Rg Veda, LO. 14.8. 

4. D. Merezhkovsky (Dante [Bologna, 1939)), wrote: “In Paleolithic times soul and body were believed to be 

inseparable; united in this world they remained joined together in the next world too. As strange as it may 
seem, cave men knew a 'resurrection of the flesh' which a Socrates and a Plato, with their 'immortality of 
the soul/ seem to have forgotten.’' 

5. Such a justification of the authority of the leaders is still preserved among some primitive populations. 


“totems” that unlike single individuals, never die; this is the life of Hades, of the 
“infemals,” of Niflheim, of the chthonic deities. 6 This teaching is found in the Hindu 
tradition where the expressions deva-yana and pitr-yana signify “path of the gods,” 
and ‘’path of the ancestors” (in the sense of manes), respectively. It is also said: 
“ These two paths, one bright and the other dark, are considered eternal in the uni¬ 
verse. In the former, man goes out and then comes back; in the latter he keeps on 
returning.” The first path “leading to Brahman,” namely, to the unconditioned state, 
is analogically associated with fire, light, the day, and the six months of the solar 
ascent during the year; it leads to the region of thunderbolts, located beyond the 
“door of the sun.” The second path, which is related to smoke, night, and the six 
months of the sun’s descent leads to the moon, which is the symbol of the principle of 
change and becoming and which is manifested here as the principle regulating the 
cycle of finite beings who continuously come and go in many ephemeral incarna¬ 
tions of the ancestral forces. 7 According to an interesting symbolism, those who 
follow the lunar path become the food of the manes and are “sacrificed” again by 
them in the semen of new mortal births. According to another significant symbol 
found in the Greek tradition, those who have not been initiated, that is to say, the 
majority of people, are condemned in Hades to do the Danaides’ work; carrying 
water in amphorae filled with holes and pouring it into bottomless barrels, thus never 
being able to fill them up; this illustrates the insignificance of their ephemeral lives, 
which keep recurring over and over again, pointlessly. Another comparable Greek 
symbol is Ocnus. who plaited a rope on the Plains of Lethe. This rope was continu¬ 
ally eaten by an ass. Ocnus symbolizes man’s activity, while the ass traditionally 
embodies the “demonic” power; in Egypt the ass was associated with the snake of 
darkness and with Am-mit, the “devourer of the dead.” 

In this context we again find the basic ideas concerning the “two natures” that I 
discussed in the first chapter. But here it is possible to penetrate deeper into the 
meaning of the existence in antiquity not only of two types of divinities, (the former 
Uranian and solar, the latter telluric and lunar), but also of the existence of two 

6. Among Assyrian-Bubylonian people we find conceptions of a larval state, similar to the Hellenic Hades, 
awaiting the majority of people after death. Also, see the Jewish notion of the dark and cold sheol in which 
the deceased, including prestigious figures .such as Abraham and David, led an unconscious and imper¬ 
sonal existence. The notion of torments, terrors and punishments in the afterlife (like the Christian notion 
of "hell”) is very recent and extraneous to the pure and original forms of Tradition; in these forms we find 
only the difference between the aristocratic, heroic, solar, and Olympian survival for some, and the disso¬ 
lution, loss of personal consciousness, larval life, or return into the cycle of generation for the others. In 
various traditions (e.g., in Egypt and in ancient Mexico) the fate of the postmortem of those who under¬ 
went the latter destiny was not even considered. 

7. In Miiitnlyani Upnni$nd( 6.30) the "path of the ancestors" is also called “the path of the Mother,” more on 
which later. See also Bhtigavadgftfi, 8.24-26. 


50 


51 




The World of Tmmon 


The Thjo Paths in mt Aeterliee 


essentially distinct types (at times even opposed to each other) of rite and cult. 8 A 
civilization’s degree of faithfulness to Tradition is determined by the degree of the 
predominance of cults and rituals of the first type over those of the second type. 
Likewise, the nature and the function of the rites proper to the world of “spiritual 
virility" is specified. 

A characteristic of what today goes by the name of the “science of religions" is 
that whenever by sheer chance it finds the right key to solve a “mystery,” it reaches 
the conclusion that this key is good to solve all mysteries. Thus, when some scholars 
learned about the idea of the totem, they began to see totems everywhere. The “to- 
temic” interpretation was shamelessly applied to the forms found in great civiliza¬ 
tions, since some scholars thought that the best explanation for them could be de¬ 
rived from earlier studies on primitive tribes. Last but not least, a sexual theory of the 
totem eventually came to be formulated. 

I will not say that the shift from the totems of those primitive populations to a 
traditional regality was a historical development; at most, it was an evolution in an 
ideal sense. A regal or an aristocratic tradition arises wherever there is dominion over 
die totems and not dominion of the totems, and wherever the bond is inverted and the 
.eep forces of the stock are given a superbiological orientation by a supernatural prin- 
ipie in the direction of an Olympian “victory" and immortality. To establish ambigu- 
nis promiscuities that make individuals more vulnerable to the powers on which they 
depend as natural beings, thus allowing the center of their being to fall deeper and 
deeper into the collective and into the prepersonal dimensions and to “placate" or to 
propitiate certain infernal influences, granting them their wish to become incarnated 
in the souls and in the world of men—this is the essence of an inferior cult that is only 
an extension of the way of being of those who have no cult and no rite at all. In other 
words, it is the characteristic of the extreme degeneration of higher traditional forms. 
To free human beings from the dominion of the totems; to strengthen them; to address 
them to the fulfillment of a spiritual form and a limit; and to bring them in an invisible 
way to the line of influences capable of creating a destiny of heroic and liberating 
immortality—this was the task of the aristocratic cult. 4 When human beings perse- 

K. All ihe main charaderisiies of ihe Greek religion are related to the opposition between duhonic am! 
Olympian deities. The opposition was not merely between Hades, Persephone, Demeter, Dionysus ami 
Zeus, Hera, Athena, Apollo, Lt was not just a matter of the difference between two orders of gods, but also 
of idle opposition between radically different cults; the consequences of tins opposition affected even the 
smallest details of the daily cult. In the second part of this work I will show' an analogous opposition, 
including its development, in other civilisations. 

9. In some traditions there is (lie belief in two demons; a divine and friendly demon (the ’‘good demon” or 
ayaQoq 8c/S}J(0\'] and an earthly demon, subjected to the body and to passions. The former may represent 
transformed influences, or the “triumphal" heredity that the individual can confirm and renew or betray 
whenever he gives in to his inferior nature, expressed by the other demon. 


vered in this cult, the fate of Hades was averted and the “way of the Mother” was 
barred. Once the divine rites were neglected, however, this destiny was reconfirmed 
and the power of the inferior nature became omnipotent again. In this way, the mean¬ 
ing of the abovementioned Oriental teaching is made manifest, namely, that those 
who neglect the rites cannot escape “hell," this word meaning both a way of being in 
this life and a destiny in the next. In its deepest sense, the duty to preserve, nourish, 
and develop the mystical fire (which was considered to be the body of the god of the 
families, cities, and empires, as well as, according to a Vedic expression, the “custo¬ 
dian of immortality” 10 ) without any interruption concealed the ritual promise to 
preserve, nourish, and develop the principle of a higher destiny and contact with 
the overworld that were created by the ancestor. In this way this fire is most inti¬ 
mately related to the fire, which especially in the Hindu and in the Greek view and, 
more generally speaking, in the Olympian-Aryan ritual of cremation, bums in the fu¬ 
neral pyre; this fire was the symbol of the power that consumes the last remains of the 
earthly nature of the deceased until it generates beyond it the “fulgurating form” of an 
immortal." 


10. Concerning the relationship between the fire tended by noble families and a divine survival, see The 
Laws ofManu, 2.232. 

11. This form is the same superindividual form of Ihe divine ancestor or of the god into whom the limited 
consciousness of the individual becomes transformed; this is why in Greece the name of the deceased 
sometimes was substituted with the name of the founding father of his stock. We may also refer to the Zen 
koan: “Show me the face you had before you were born.” 


52 


53 



Life mid Death of Civiuzmioni 


9 


Life and Death of Civilizations 


I n those areas in which Tradition retained all of its vitality the dynastic succession 
of sacred kings represented an axis of light and of eternity within the temporal 
framework, the victorious presence of the supernatural in the world, and the “Olym¬ 
pian” component that transfigures the demonic element of chaos and bestows a higher 
meaning to state, nation, and race. Even in the lower strata of society, the hierarchi¬ 
cal bond created by a conscious and virile devotion was considered a means to ap¬ 
proach, and to participate in, the supernatural. 

In fact, invested with authority from above, the simple law acted as a reference 
and a support that went beyond mere human individuality for those who could not 
light the supernatural fire for themselves. In reality, the intimate, free, and effective 
dedication of one’s entire life to traditional norms, even when a full understanding of 
their inner dimension was not present to justify such an adherence, was enough to 
acquire objectively a higher meaning: through obedience, faithfulness, and action in 
conformity with traditional principles and limitations an invisible force shaped such 
a life and oriented it toward that supernatural axis that in others (in those privileged 
few at the top of the hierarchy) existed as a state of truth, realization, and light. In 
this manner, a stable and lively organism was formed that was constantly oriented 
toward the overworld and sanctified in power and in act according to its hierarchical 
degrees in the various domains of thinking, feeling, acting, and struggling. Such was 
the climate of the world of Tradition. 

All of the exterior life was a rite, namely, an approximation, more or 
less efficacious and depending on individuals and groups, to a truth that 
the exterior life cannot produce by itself, but that allows a person to 
realize one's self in part or entirely, provided it is lived in a saintly 
way, These people lived the same life that they led for centuries; they 
made of this world a ladder in order to achieve liberation. These peoples 
used to think, to act, to love, to hate, and to wage war on each other in 


a saintly way; they had erected the one temple among a great number 
of other temples through which the stream of the waters ran. This temple 
was the bed of the river, the traditional truth, the holy syllable in the 
heart of the world . 1 

At this level to leave the parameters of Tradition meant to leave the true life. To 
abandon the rites, alter or violate the laws or mix the castes corresponded to a re¬ 
gression from a structured universe (cosmos) back into chaos, or to a relapse to the 
state of being under the power of the elements and of the totems—to take the “path 
leading to the hells” where death is the ultimate reality and where a destiny of con¬ 
tingency and of dissolution is the supreme rule. 

This applied to both single individuals and to entire peoples. Any analysis of 
history wil l reveal that just like man, civilizations too, after a dawn and an ensuing 
development, eventually decline and die. Some people have attempted to discover 
the Jaw responsible for the decline of various civilizations. I do not think that the 
cause or causes can be reduced to merely historical and naturalistic factors. 

Among various writers, de Gobineau is the one who probably better demon¬ 
strates the insufficiency of the majority of the empirical causes that have been ad¬ 
duced to explain the decline of great civilizations. He showed, for instance, that a 
civilization does not collapse simply because its political power has been either bro¬ 
ken or swept away: “The same type of civilization sometimes endures even under a 
foreign occupation and defies the worst catastrophic events, while some other times, 
in the presence of mediocre mishaps, it just disappears.” Not even the quality of the 
governments, in the empirical (namely, administrative and organizational) sense of 
the word, exercises much influence on the longevity of civilizations. De Gobineau 
remarked that civilizations, just like living organisms, may survive for a long time 
even though they carry within themselves disorganizing tendencies in addition to the 
spiritual unity that is the life of the one common Tradition; India and feudal Europe, 
for example, show precisely the absence of both a unitary organization and a single 
economic system or form of legislation on the one hand and a marked pluralism with 
repeatedly recurring antagonisms on the other. 2 

Not even the so-called corruption of morals, in its most profane and moralist! 
cally bourgeois sense, may be considered the cause of the collapse of civilizations, 
the corruption of morals at most may be an effect, but it is not the real cause. In 
almost every instance we have to agree with Nietzsche, who claimed that wherever 
the preoccupation with “morals” arises is an indication that a process of decadence is 

1. G. De Giorgio, “Azione e contemplazione," La Torre, no. 2 (1930). 

2, J. de Gobineau. The Inequality of Human Races. 


54 


55 



Tut World of Iraditioa 


Lifl nnD Death of Civilization 


already at work; the wos of Vico’s “heroic ages" has nothing to do with moralistic 
limitations. The Far Eastern tradition especially has emphasized the idea that morals 
and laws in general (in a conformist and social sense) arise where “virtue” and the 
“Way” are no longer known: 

When the Tao was lost, its attributes appeared; when its attributes were 
lost, benevolence appeared; when benevolence was lost, righteousness 
appeared; and when righteousness was lost, the proprieties appeared. 

Now propriety is the attenuated form of filial piety and good faith, and 
is also the commencement of disorder . 3 

As far as the traditional laws are concerned, taken in their sacred character and in 
their transcendent finality, then just as they had a nonhuman value, likewise they 
could not be reduced in any way to the domain of morality in the current sense of the 
word. Antagonism between peoples ora state of war between them is in itself not the 
cause of a civilization’s collapse; on the contrary, the imminent sense of danger, just 
like victory, can consolidate, even in a material way, the network of a unitary struc¬ 
ture and heat up a people’s spirit through external manifestations, while peace and 
well-being may lead to a state of reduced tension that favors the action of the deeper 
causes of a possible disintegration. 4 

The idea that is sometimes upheld against the insufficiency of these explana¬ 
tions is that of race. The unity and the purity of blood are believed by some to be the 
foundation of life and the strength of a civilization; therefore, the mixing and the 
ensuing “poisoning” of the blood are considered the initial cause of a civilization’s 
decline. This too is an illusion, which among other things, lowers the notion of civili¬ 
zation to a naturalistic and biological plane, since this is the plane on which race is 
thought of in our day and age. Race, blood, hereditary purity of blood: these are 
merely “material” factors. A civilization in the true, traditional sense of the word 
arises only when a supernatural and nonhuman force of a higher order—a force that 
corresponds to the “pontifical” function, to the component of the rite, and to the 
principle of spirituality as the basis of a hierarchical differentiation of people—acts 
upon these factors. At the origin of every' true civilization there lies a “divine” event 
(every great civilization has its own myth concerning divine founders): thus, no hu¬ 
man or naturalistic factor can fully account for it. The adulteration and decline of 
civilizations is caused by an event of the same order, though it acts in the opposite, 
degenerative sense. When a race has lost contact with the only thing that has and can 

3. Tno t e Chi nil, 38, in R. Van Over, cd., Chinese Mystics (New York, 1973). 22. 

4. For a critique of these alleged causes of the decline of'civilizations, see de Gobineau’s The Inequality of 
Human Races. 


provide stability, namely, with the world of “Being”; and when in a race that which 
forms its most subtle yet most essential element has been lost, namely, the inner race 
and the race of the spirit—compared to which the race of the body and of the soul are 
only external manifestations and means of expression*—-then the collective or¬ 
ganisms that a race has generated, no matter how great and powerful, are destined 
to descend into the world of contingency; they are at the mercy of what is irra¬ 
tional, becoming, and “historical,” and of what is shaped “from below” and from the 
outside. 

Blood and ethnic purity are factors that are valued in traditional civilizations 
too; their value, however, never justifies the employment, in the case of human be¬ 
ings, of the same criteria employed to ascertain the presence of “pure blood” in a dog 
or in a horse—as is the case in some modern racist ideologies. The “blood” or “ra¬ 
cial” factor plays a certain role not because it exists in the “psyche” (in the brain and 
in the opinions of an individual), but in the deepest forces of life that various tradi¬ 
tions experience and act upon as typical formative energies. The blood registers the 
effects of this action, yet it provides through heredity a material that is preformed 
and refined so that through several generations, realizations similar to the original 
ones may be prepared and developed in a natural and spontaneous way. It is on this 
foundation—and on this foundation only—that, as we shall see, the traditional world 
often practiced the heredity of the castes and willed endogamous laws. If we refer, 
however, to the Indo-Aryan tradition in which the caste system was the most rigor¬ 
ously applied, simply to be bom in a caste, though necessary, was not considered 
enough; it was necessary for the quality virtually conferred upon a person at birth to 
be actualized by initiation. I have already mentioned that according to the 
Manudhamiasastra , unless a man undergos initiation or “second birth,” even though 
he may be an Aryan, he is not superior to a sudra. I also related how three special 
differentiations of the divine fire animated the three hierarchically higher Persian 
pishtra , and that definite membership in one of them was sealed at the moment of 
initiation. Even in these instances we should not lose sight of two factors being present, 
and never mistake the formative element for the element that is formed, nor the 
conditioning for the conditioned factor. Both the higher castes and traditional aristoc¬ 
racies, as well as superior civilizations and races (those that enjoy the same status 
that the consecrated castes enjoy vis-a-vis the plebeian castes of the “children of the 
Earth”) cannot be explained by blood, but through the blood, by something that goes 
beyond blood and that has a metabiological character. 

When this “something” is truly powerful, or when it constitutes the deeper and 

5. For n more detailed account of nice mid of (lie relationship between the somatic, soul, and spiritual race, 
sec my Sinicsi di dottrina della razza (Milan, I L )41). 


56 


57 



The World of Trhditioh 


Life nno Death of CmuznTions 


most stable nucleus of a traditional civilization, then that civilization can preserve 
and reaffirm itself—even when ethnical mixtures and alterations occur (no matter 
how destructive they may be)—by reacting on the heterogeneous elements, and 
shaping them, by reducing them slowly but gradually to their own type, or by regen¬ 
erating itself into a new, vibrant unity. In historical times there are a number of cases 
of this: China, Greece, Rome, Islam. Only when a civilization’s generating root “from 
above” is no longer alive and its “spiritual race” is worn out or broken does its de¬ 
cline set in, and this in tandem with its secularization and humanization/’ 

When it comes to this point, the only forces that can be relied upon are those of 
the blood, which still carries atavistically within itself, through race and instinct, the 
echo and the trace of the departed higher element that has been lost; it is only in this 
way that the “racist” thesis in defense of the purity of blood can be validly upheld— 
if not to prevent, at least to delay the fatal outcome of the process of dissolution. It is 
impossible, however, to really prevent this outcome without an inner awakening. 

Analogous observations can be made concerning the value and the power of 
traditional forms, principles, and laws. In a traditional social order there must be 
iomebody in whom the principle upon which various institutions, legislations, and 
ethical and ritual regulations are based is truly active; this principle, though, must be 
an objective spiritual realization and not a simulacrum. In other words, what is re¬ 
quired is an individual or an elite to assume the “pontifical” function of lords and 
mediators of power from above. Then even those who can only obey but who cannot 
adopt the law other than by complying with the external authority and tradition are 
able intuitively to know why they must obey; their obedience is not sterile because it 
allows them to participate effectively in the power and in the light. Just as when a 
magnetic current is present in a main circuit and induced currents are produced in 
other distinct circuits, provided they are syntonically arranged—likewise, some of 
the greatness, stability, and “fortune” that are found in the hierarchical apex pass 
invisibly into those who follow the mere form and the ritual with a pure heart. In that 
case, the tradition is firmly rooted, the social organism is unified and connected in all 
of its parts by an occult bond that is generally stronger than external contingencies. 

When at the center, however, there is only a shallow function or when the titles 
of the representatives of the spiritual and regal authority are only nominal, then the 

6. We nmy here consider A. J. Toynbee's thesis (A Study of History' L London. 1934 p according to which, a 
lew exceptions notwithstanding, there have never been civilizations that have been killed, but only civili¬ 
zations that have committed suicide. Wherever the inner strength exists and does not abdicate, then diffi¬ 
culties. dangers, an adverse environment, attacks from the outside, ami even invasions may become a 
stimulus or a challenge that induces that inner strength to react in a creative way. Toynbee saw m these 
external elements the conditions for the advent and for the development of civilizations. 


pinnacle dissolves and the support crumbles. 7 A highly significant legend in this re¬ 
gard is that of the people of Gog and Magog, who symbolize chaotic and demonic 
forces that are held back by traditional structures. According to this legend, these 
people attack when they realize that there is no longer anybody blowing the trum¬ 
pets on that wall upon which an imperial type had previously arrested their siege, 
and that it was only the wind that produced the sounds they were hearing. Rites, 
institutions, laws, and customs may still continue to exist for a certain time; but with 
their meaning lost and their “virtue” paralyzed they are nothing but empty shells. 
Once they are abandoned to themselves and have become secularized, they crumble 
like parched clay and become increasingly disfigured and altered, despite all at¬ 
tempts to retain from the outside, whether through violence or imposition, the lost 
inner unity. As long as a shadow of the action of the superior element remains, how¬ 
ever, and an echo of it exists in the blood, the structure remains standing, the body 
still appears endowed with a soul, and the corpse—to use an image employed by 
de Gobineau—walks and is still capable of knocking down obstacles in its path. 
When the last residue of the force from above and of the race of the spirit is ex¬ 
hausted, in the new generations nothing else remains; there is no longer a riverbed to 
channel the current that is now dispersed in every direction. What emerges at this 
point is individualism, chaos, anarchy, a humanist hubris, and degeneration in every 
domain. The dam is broken. Although a semblance of ancient grandeur still remains, 
the smallest impact is enough to make an empire or state collapse and be replaced 
with a demonic inversion, namely, with the modem, omnipotent Leviathan, which is 
a mechanized and “totalitarian” collective system. 

From prehistoric times to our own day and age this is what “evolution” has been 
all about. As we shall see, from the distant myth of divine regality through the 
descent from one caste to the next, mankind will reach the faceless fonns of our 
contemporary civilization in which the tyranny of the pure demos and the world of 
the masses is increasingly and frightful ly reawakening in the structures of mechani¬ 
zation. 


7. According to the Hindu tradition, the tour great ages of the world, oryniyj.s', depend on the kings’s state: the 
Dark Age (Kali Yuga) corresponds to the state in which the regal function is “asleep”; the Golden Age 
corresponds to the state in whieli the king reproduces the symbolic actions of the Aryan gods. 


58 


59 



IniTIOTIOIl MID (OIMMTIOn 


10 


Initiation and Consecration 


H aving defined the essence of both the pinnacle and center of a traditional civi¬ 
lization, it is necessary to describe briefly some of its external features thaL 
refer to already conditioned existential situations. This will enable me to indicate the 
origin of the first alteration of the world of Tradition. 

The regal idea occurs in an already weakened form when it no longer becomes 
incarnated in beings who are naturally above human limitations, but rather in beings 
who must develop this quality within themselves. In the ancient Hellenic tradition, 
such a distinction corresponded analogically to that between a “god” (Olympian 
ideal) and a “hero.” In terms of the Roman tradition this distinction was formally 
sanctioned through the titles of deus and divus, the latter always designating a man 
who had become a god, the former designating a being who had always been a god. 
According to tradition, in Egypt the regal race of the Been was replaced by that of the 
f]fdiBeoi (who correspond to the “heroes”), who in turn precede in time the race of 
the v^kvec;, an expression subject to being referred mainly to human leaders. What 
emerges in this context is a situation in which there is a certain distance between the 
person and the function being exercised: in order for a person to embody a certain 
function what is required is a specific action capable of producing in him a new 
quality; this action may appear either in the form of an initiation or of an investiture 
(or consecration). In the first case this action has a relatively autonomous and direct 
character; in the second case it is mediated, or it takes place from the outside through 
a priestly caste distinct from the regal caste. 

As far as the regal initiation is concerned, it will suffice to repeat what has been 
said about the ritual, sacrificial, and triumphal actions that reenact those deeds at¬ 
tributed to a god or a hero with the intent of actualizing, evoking, or renewing the 
corresponding supernatural influences. This occurred in a very specific way in an¬ 
cient Egypt. As I have said, the king at his enthronement reenacted the “sacrifice” 
that made Osiris a transcendent divinity; this rite was used not only as a way to 


renew the quality of a nature that was already divine by birth, but also and foremost 
as an initiation aimed at arousing the dimension of transcendence in the man who 
was destined to be king and at granting him “the gift of life.” As far as the details of 
similar rites are concerned, I will limit myself to describing the rite that in the 
Eleusinian Mysteries corresponded to the bestowal of the regal title. 1 

The future “king” first spends some time in solitary confinement. Then he must 
swim across a river through blood and vortices—in other words, he crosses the “stream 
of generation” by means of his own strength, leaving behind on the riverbank his old 
body, soul, and personality. The river is later crossed again by boat, 2 and the king 
wears animal skins. These skins apparently signified totem ic powers that emerged 
as a consequence of the suspension of the ephemeral, external I, powers that also 
represented the powers of the community; this symbolism was meant to establish a 
contact and an identification with the supernatural dimension. In the Bacchic ritual, 
after devouring the victims the Corybantes wore their skins; this was meant as an 
identification with the god represented by the sacrificial victims and as the act of 
taking on his strength and nature; the Egyptian initiate too wore the skin of a victim 
representing Set. Thus, the overall symbolism of the new phase of the ritual probably 
refers to the achievement of a state in which one can undertake the symbolic cross¬ 
ing, thanks to which he will be qualified to become the leader, even after assuming 
certain powers related to the subterranean and vital dimension of the collective or¬ 
ganism. 

The future “king” eventually reaches the other bank of the river and now must 
climb to the top of a mountain. Darkness surrounds him, but the gods help him to 
climb the path and to rise several levels. We notice here a recurrence of well-known 
symbols: the dry land or island, the mountain or the height. Moreover, we find the 

1. My primary source is the reconstruction of the Eleusinian Mysteries proposed by V. Magnien in his Lcs 
Mystdres d 'Eleasis. 

2. Because of their traditional character, each of these phases could generate innumerable comparisons. 
Crossing the waters, together with the symbol of navigating, is one of the most recurrent themes. The ship 
is one of the symbols ascribed to Janus, which later on was incorporated into the Catholic pontifical sym¬ 
bolism. The Chaldean hero Gilgamesh who walks on the "sun's path” and on the “mountain path,” must 
cross the ocean in order to reach a divine garden where he will find the gift of immortality. The crossing of 
a great river and a number of various trials consisting in encounters with animals (totems), storms, and the 
like, is also found in both the ancient Mexican and Nordic-Aryan (crossing of the river Thund in order to 
arrive in Valhalla) journey after death. The crossing of the waters is found in the Nordic saga of the hero 
Siegfried, who says: "1 can lead you there [to the ‘island 1 of the divine woman Brunhild, a land 'known to 
Siegfried alone’] riding the waves. I am accomplished in the true ways of the sea” (Niebelungcnlied, 6); 
and it is also found in the Vedas where the king Yama, conceived as the “Sun’s son” and as the first among 
the beings who have found their way to the otherworld, is called "he who has gone far out into the sea.” 
{Rg Veda, 10.14,1-2; 10.10.1). The symbolism of the crossing is very frequent in Buddhism, while in 
Jainism we find the expression tfrthatpkara ("ford-builder’’). 


60 


61 



The World of Tmiditioh 


IniTiRTion (hid ConsECRATion 


idea of planetary influences (the “rings” may correspond to the Platonic seven wheels 
of destiny”) that one must overcome by climbing all the way to the symbolic region 
of the fixed stars, which represent the states of the pure world of being. 1 his corre¬ 
sponds to the passage from the Lesser to the Greater Mysteries and to the old distinc¬ 
tion between the lunar and telluric rite and the solar and Olympian rite. 1 he person 
who is to be initiated is welcomed by other kings and by the highest dignitaries; he 
walks into an illuminated temple in order to establish contact with the divine; he is 
reminded to fulfill the main duties of a king; he finally receives the robes and the 
insignia of his dignity and sits on the throne. 

In Egypt, the rite of regal initiation included three separate moments correspond¬ 
ing to the abovementioned phases; first came a purification; then the rite ot the re¬ 
ception of the supernatural fluid symbolized by the crown (urneus) or by the double 
crown (the crown was often called the “great sorceress,” who "establishes at the 
right and at the left hand of the king the gods of eternity and of stability”); and 
finally, the “ascent” to the temple representing the “otherworld” (paduat) and the 
“embrace” of the solar god, which was the definitive consecration that sanctified this 
new immortalizing birth and his divine nature and by virtue of winch the Egyptian 
king appeared as the “son” of the same god. 

The Eleusinian rite is one of the most complete rites of “regal” initiation; alleg¬ 
edly each of the symbols employed therein corresponded to a particular inner expe¬ 
rience. Though at this time I do not intend to describe the means through which 
similar experiences were induced or what they were all about,- 1 wish to emphasize 
that in the world of Tradition, initiation in its highest forms was conceived as an 
intensely real operation that was capable of changing the ontological status of the 
individual and of grafting onto him certain forces of the world of Being, or of the 
overworld. The title of rex (in Greek, pacnMvg) at Eleusis testified to the acquired 
supernatural dimension that potentially qualified the function of the leader. The fact 
that at the time of the Eleusinian Mysteries this title certainly did not go together 
with effective political authority was due to the decadence of ancient Hellas. Be¬ 
cause of this decadence, the ancient regal dignity was retained on a different plane 
than that of royal power, which by then had fallen into profane hands. 3 4 * * This did not 

3. See Introduzione alia magia (Milan, 1952) and also my other work, The Hormone Tradition, It has heen 
suggested that the requirement for the regal dignity consists in the control of the tmmas nhe inner and 
ttanscendent root of the five senses), which is also a requirement for the succevslui practice u\ yoga anti 
asceticism. See The Laws of Mann, 7.44. 

4. As far as Rome is concerned we may notice the shift from the integral notion of regahiy to die Narrow er 

notion of rex sacrorum , the king’s competence being limited to the sacral dimension. This shin was jumi 

fied to the degree to which the king had to engage in military matters. 


prevent temporal sovereigns in ancient times, however, from aspiring to achieve the 
dignity ot an initiatory king, which was very different from the dignity that they 
actually enjoyed. Thus, for instance, when Hadrian and Antoninus were already 
Roman emperors, they received the title of “king” only after being initiated at Eleusis. 
According to concordant testimonies, the quality bestowed by initiation is distinct 
jiom and unre I a ted to any human merit: all of the human virtues combined could not 
produce this quality, just as, to a certain extent, no human “sin” could affect ltd An 
echo ot this notion was preserved in the Catholic view according to which the priestly 
dignity, which is transmitted sacramentally, cannot be effaced by any moral sin com¬ 
mitted by the person endowed with it, since it remains in that person as an indoles 
indelebilis, an “indelible mark” (“You are a priest forever,” Ps. 110:4). Moreover, as 
in the case of the Mazdean notion of “glory” and of the Chinese notion of “virtue,” 
the priestly dignity corresponded to an objective power. In ancient China a distinc¬ 
tion was made between those who were naturally endowed with “knowledge” and 
’ virtue (those who are capable of “tulhlling Heaven’s law with calm and imper¬ 
turbability and no help lrom the outside” are at the pinnacle, and are “perfected” and 
“transcendent men) and those who achieved them “by disciplining themselves and 
by reluming to the rites.” h The discipline (sieu-ki) that is suitable to the latter men 
and that is the equivalent ot initiation was considered only as a means to the real 
creation of that "superior man” (kiun-tze) who could legitimately assume the func¬ 
tion proper to the supreme hierarchical apex by virtue of the mysterious and real 
power inherent in him. The distinctive feature of what makes one a king is more 
evident when a consecration rather than an initiation occurs; for instance, only the 
characteristic special investiture that turns the already crowned Teutonic prince into 
the romunorum rex can bestow upon him the authority and die title of leader of the 
Holy Roman Empire. Plato wrote; “In Egypt no king is allowed to rule without be¬ 
longing to the priestly class; if by any chance a king of another race rises to power 
through violence, he eventually needs to be initiated into this class.” 7 

Likewise, Plutarch wrote that “A king chosen from among the warriors instantly 
became a priest and shared in the philosophy that is hidden for the most part in myths 
and stories that show dim reflections and insights of the truth.” 8 The same was true 

5. "Just as lire instantly burns up the fuel that it touches with its brilliant energy, so a man who knows the 
Veda bums up all evil with the fire of his knowledge.” The Laws ofManti, 1 1 . 246 . Also: “A priest who 
retains the Rg Veda in his memory incurs no guilt at all, even if he destroys these three worlds or eats food 
taken from anyone whatever” (1 1 , 262 ). 

6. Analects, 12 . 1 ; 14 . 45 . 

7. Statesman. 29(kj-c. 

H. Dc I side ct Osindc , 9. 


62 


63 




The World of Tradition 


Iaitiatioo add (onstCRATion 


for the Parsis; it was precisely because the Persian Great Kings were elevated to the 
dignity of “magi” at the time of their enthronement and thus reunited the two powers 
that Iran did not experience conflicts or antagonisms between royalty and priesthood 
during the better period of its tradition. At the same time it must be noted that tradi¬ 
tionally, while those who had received the initiation were kings, the opposite was 
also true, namely, the fact that often the initiation and the priestly function itself 
were considered a prerogative of kings and of aristocratic castes. For instance, in 
the Homeric Hymn to Demeter (verse 270 ff.), the goddess allegedly restricted to 
the four Eleusinian princes and to their descendants the “celebration of the cult 
and the knowledge of sacred orgies,” by virtue of which “at death one does not incur 
the same fate as others.” Ancient Rome struggled for a long time against the plebe¬ 
ian prevarication, and insisted that the priests of the higher collegia and especially 
the consuls (who originally enjoyed a sacred character themselves) were to be 
chosen only from patrician families. In this context, the need for a unitary authority 
was affirmed together with the instinctive acknowledgment that such an authority 
ias a stronger foundation in those cases in which the race of the blood and the race of 
Lhe spirit converge. 

Let us now examine the case of kings who have not been raised to a superindi¬ 
vidual dignity through initiation but rather through an investiture or a consecration 
that is mediated by a priestly caste; this form is typical of more recent, historical 
times. The primordial theocracies did not derive their authority from a church or 
from a priestly caste. The Nordic kings were kings immediately by virtue of their 
divine origin, and just like the kings of the Doric-Achaean period, they were the only 
celebrants of sacrificial actions. In China the emperor received his mandate directly 
“from heaven.” Until recently in Japan, the ritual of enthronement took place in the 
context of the individual spiritual experience of the emperor, who established con¬ 
tact with the influences of the regal tradition without the presence of an officiating 
clergy. Even in Greece and in Rome the priestly collegia did not “make" kings through 
their rites, but limited themselves to exercising the divinatory science in order to 
ascertain whether the person appointed to exercise the regal function “was found 
pleasing to the gods”; in other words, it was an issue of acknowledgment and not of 
investiture, as in the ancient Scottish tradition concerning the so-called Stone of 
Destiny. Conversely, at the origins of Rome the priesthood was conceived as some 
kind of emanation of the primitive regality and the king himself promulgated the 
laws regulating the cult. Alter Romulus, who was himself initiated to the divinatory 
art, Numa delegated the typically priestly functions to the col legium of the fiamine. s\ 
which he himself instituted; 9 at the time of the empire, the priestly body was again 

9. Cicero, On the Nature of the Gods, 3.2, Livy, The History of Rome. 1.20. 


subjected to the authority of the Caesars, just like the Christian clergy later became 
subjected to the Byzantine emperor. In Egypt, until the Twenty-first Dynasty, the 
king delegated a priest (designated as “the king’s priest,” nutir hon) to perform the 
rites only sporadically, and the spiritual authority itself always represented a reflec¬ 
tion of the royal authority. The paleo-Egyptian nutir hon parallels the role often 
played in India by the purohita , who was a brahman a employed at court and in 
charge of performing fire sacrifices. The Germanic races ignored consecration up to 
the Carolingian era; Charlemagne crowned himself, and so did Ludovicus and Pius, 
who later crowned his own son, Lothar, without any direct involvement on the part of 
the pope. The same holds true for the earlier forms of all traditional civilization, 
including the historical cycles of pre-Colombian America, and especially for the 
Peruvian dynasty of the “solar masters” or Incas. 

On the contrary, when a priestly caste or a church claims to be the exclusive 
holder of that sacred force that alone can empower the king to exercise his function, 
this marks the beginning of an involutive process. A spirituality that in and of itself is 
not regal, and conversely, a regality that is not spiritual, eventually emerged; this 
spirituality and this regality enjoyed separate existences. Also, a “feminine” spiritu¬ 
ality and a material virility began to coexist jointly with a lunar “sacredness” and a 
material “solarity.” The original synthesis, which corresponded to the primordial 
regal attribute of the “glory” or of the celestial “fire” of the “conquerors,” was dis¬ 
solved and the plane of absolute centrality was lost. We shall see later on that such a 
split marks the beginning of the descent of civilizations in the direction that has led to 
the genesis of the modern world. 

Once the fracture occurred, the priestly caste portrayed itself as the caste in 
charge of attracting and transmitting spiritual influences, but without being capable 
of constituting their dominating center within the temporal order. This dominating 
center, instead, was virtually present in the quality of a warrior or a nobleman of the 
king to whom the rite of consecration communicated these influences (the “Holy 
Spirit” in the Catholic tradition) so that he may assume them and actualize them in 
an efficient form. Thus, in more recent times it is only through this priestly mediation 
and through a rite’s virtus deit'icans that the synthesis of the regal and priestly dimen¬ 
sions is reconstituted, a synthesis that is supposed to be the supreme hierarchical 
peak of a traditional social order. It is only in this way that the king again can be 
something more than a mere mortal. 

Likewise, in the Catholic ritual the dress a king was supposed to wear before the 
rite of the investiture was simply a “military” dress; it is only in later times that a king 
began to wear the “regal dress” during the ceremony and began the tradition of 
sitting on an “elevated place” that had been reserved for him in the church. The 
rigorously symbolical meaning of the various phases of the ceremony has been pre- 


64 


65 



The World of Tradition 


IniTIBTIOn RFID Cons ECRRIICm 


served almost up to modem times. It is significant to find in older times the recurrent 
use of the expression “regal religion,” for which the enigmatic figure of Melchizedek 
was often evoked; already in the Merovingian era in reference to the king we find 
the formula: “Melchizedeknoster, merito rex atque sacerdos. ’’The king, who during 
the rite took off the dress that he previously put on, was believed to be one who 
“leaves the mundane state in order to assume the state of regal religion .” In a.d. 769 
Pope Stephanus III reminded the Carolingians that they were a sacred race and a 
royal priesthood: "Vos gens sancta estis , atque regales estis sacerdotium” Regal 
consecration was bestowed through anointing; back in those times this rite differed 
from the rite of consecration of bishops only in a few minor details, and therefore the 
king became as holy as a priest before men and God. Anointing, which belonged to 
the Jewish tradition and which was eventually taken up again by Catholicism, was 
the habitual rite employed to transfer a being from a profane into a sacred world;' 11 
according to the Ghibelline ideal it was thanks to his virtue that the consecrated 
person became a deus-homo , in spiritu et virtute Christus domini, in una eminentia 
divinificationis—summus et instructor sanctae ecclesine. Therefore it was said that 
“the king must stand out from the mass of lay people, since he participates in the 
priestly function by his having been anointed by consecrated oil.” The anonymous 
author of York wrote: “The king, the Christ [anointed] of the Lord, cannot be re¬ 
garded as being a layman.” In the sporadic emergence of the idea that the rite of 
regal consecration has the power to erase every sin committed, including those that 
involved the shedding of blood, we find an echo of the abovementioned initiatory 
doctrine concerning the transcendence of the supernatural quality vis-a-vis any hu¬ 
man virtue or sin. 

In this chapter I have discussed initiation in relation to the positive function of 
regality, even when considered in materia l terms. I have also mentioned instances in 
which the initiatory dignity separated itself from that function, or better, instances in 
which that function separated itself from the initiatory dignity by becoming secular¬ 
ized and by taking on a merely warrior or political character. Initiation must also be 
considered, however, as an independent category of the world of Tradition without a 
necessaiy relation to the exercise of a visible function at the center of a society. 
Initiation (high-level initiation, not to be confused with initiation that is related to the 
regimen of the castes or to the traditional professions and the various artisan guilds) 
has defined, in and of itself, the action that determines an ontological transformation 


of man. High-level initiation has generated initiatory chains that were often invisible 
and subterranean and that preserved an identical spiritual influence and an “inner 
doctrine” superior to the exoteric and religious forms of a historical tradition. 11 There 
are even instances in which the initiate has enjoyed this distinct character in a nor¬ 
mal civilization and not only during the ensuing period of degeneration and inner 
fracture of the traditional unity. This character has become necessaiy and all-perva¬ 
sive, especially in Europe in these latter times because of the involutive processes 
that have led both to the organization of the modern world and to the advent of 
Christianity (hence the merely initiatory character of the hermetic rex, of the 
Rosicrucian emperor, and so on). 


10. David was anointed by Samuel, "and the spirit of the Lord came upon David from that day forward.” 
1 Sam. 16:13. In some medieval texts the oil of regal consecration was assimilated to the oil used to 
consecrate prophets, priests, and martyrs. During the Caroltngian era. the bishop at the time of consecra¬ 
tion pronounced the words: "May God in his mercy grant you the crown of glory: may He pour upon you 
the oil of the grace of the Holy Spirit, which He poured upon His priests, kings, prophets, and martyrs." 


11. For a definition of the specific nature of initiatory realization, sec chapter 14 in my L’urco c la clavn, 


66 


67 



Reiatioinwp Betiuem Row hod Priesthood 


11 


On the Hierarchical Relationship 
Between Royalty and Priesthood 

I f on the one hand the original synthesis of the two powers is reestablished in the 
person of the consecrated king, on the other hand, the nature of Lhe hierarchical 
■elationships existing in every normal social order between royalty and priestly caste 
or church), which is merely the mediator of supernatural influences, is very clearly 
defined: regality enjoys primacy over the priesthood, just as, symbolically speaking, 
he sun has primacy over the moon and the man over the woman. In a certain sense 
this is the same primacy over Abraham’s priesthood that was traditionally attributed 
to the priestly regality of Melchizedek, who performed sacrifices in the name of the 
Almighty, the God of Victoiy (“God Most High who delivered your foes into your 
hand,” Gen. 14:20). As I have said, the medieval apologists of the Ghibelline ideal 
occasionally referred to the symbol of Melchizedek when laying claim, over and 
against the Church, to the privileges and to the supernatural dignity of the monarchy. 1 

When referring to thoroughly traditional civilizations, it is helpful to employ Aryan 
or Indo-Aryan texts in order to emphasize that even in a civilization that appears to 
be characterized mainly by the priestly caste, the notion of the correct relationship 
between the two dignities was preserved to a large extent. In these texts, which I 
have previously quoted, it is said that the stock of the warrior deities arose from Brah¬ 
man as a higher and more perfect form than Brahman itself. Reading on: “This is 
why nothing is greater than the warrior nobility (ksatram); the priests (brahmana) 
themselves venerate the warrior when the consecration of the king occurs.” 2 

1. In (he Middle Ages, the mysterious figure of the royal Prester John replicated somewhat the figure of 
Melchizedek, while at the same lime being related to the idea of a supreme center of the world. There is 
a legend according to which Prester John sent a salamander's skin, fresh water, and a ring that bestowed 
victory and invisibility to "Frederick"; this legend expresses the confused belief in a relationship between 
the medieval imperial authority and some kind of transmission of the authority found in that center. 

2. Bfhad-Sranyaka Upanisati, 1.4.11. 


In the same text, the priestly caste that was assimilated to that Brahman (under¬ 
stood here in an impersonal manner and in an analogous sense to what in Christian¬ 
ity is considered to be the power, or donamis, of the Holy Spirit), which is in its 
safekeeping, was represented as a mother or as a maternal matrix (yoni) in relation 
to the warrior or regal caste. This is particularly meaningful. The regal type is pre¬ 
sented here according to its value as male principle, which surpasses, individuates, 
masters, and rules “triumphantly” over the spiritual force, which is conceived of as a 
mother and as a female. Reference was made to ancient traditions concerning a type 
of regality that was attained by marrying a divine woman, often portrayed as a mother 
(this symbolizes incest, whereby the Egyptian king, in a broader context, was given 
the title of “his mother’s bull”). We are led again to the same point. Therefore, even 
when the rite of investiture is considered necessary, this does not establish or ac¬ 
knowledge the subordination of the king perse to the priestly caste. After the race of 
beings who are by nature more than mere human beings became extinct, a king was, 
prior to his consecration, simply a “warrior,” provided that he did individually rise to 
something higher through other means. 3 But in the rite of consecration the king, 
rather than receiving, assumes a power that the priestly class does not own but rather 
has in custody; this power is then supposed to rise to a “higher form” that it did not 
possess before. Also, in consecration the virile and warrior quality of the person to be 
initiated frees itself and rises to a higher plane; 4 it then acts as an axis or as a pole of 
the sacred force. This is why the officiating priest must “worship” the king whom he 
consecrates, although the latter, according to a text, owes to the brahmana the re- 
spectowedtoa mother. In the Manudhannasastra itself, although the primacy of the 
brahmana is upheld, the latter is compared to the water and to the stone, while the 
ksatriya is compared to the fire and to iron. The text goes on to say that “rulers do not 
prosper without priests and priests do not thrive without rulers,” and that “the priest is 
said to be the root of the law, and the ruler is the peak.” 5 Odd as it may seem, these 
ideas originally were not totally alien to Christianity itself. According to the testi- 

X In the Hindu tradition there are plenty of instances of kings who already posses or eventually achieve a 
spiritual knowledge greater than that possessed by the brfihmana. This is the case, for instance, of King 
Jaiva la, whose knowledge was not imparted by any priest, but rather reserved to the warrior caste (kymnim) 
also, in Bfhad-ilranyaka Upani$ud{43. 1) King Jana ka teaches the brahmana Y5jnavalkya the doctrine o 
the transcendent Self. 

4. In a text called Pancavimtaii Brfthmnna (18,10.8) we read that although in the regal consecration the 
formulations employed are the same as those inherent to the biTihmann (the priestly caste), the latter has 
to be subjected to the ksarram (the regal-warrior caste). The qualities that characterize the aristocrat and 
the warrior (rather than the priest strictly speaking) and that, once integrated in the sacred, reproduce the 
"solar" peak of spirituality, are the foundation of the well-known fact that in the highest traditions the 
priests, in the higher sense of the word, were chosen only from among the patrician families; initiation and 
the transmission of transcendent knowledge was reserved to these families alone. 

5. TheLawsofManu, 11.221-22; 11.83-84. 


68 


69 




The World of Tradition 


Relationship Betweeii Royfluy mid Priesthood 


mony of Eginhard, after Charlemagne was consecrated and hailed with the formula, 
“Long life and victory to Charles the Great, crowned by God, great and peaceful 
emperor of the Romans!” the pope “prostrated himself (adoravit) before Charles, 
according to the ritual established at the time of the ancient emperors.” 6 In the time 
of Charlemagne and of Louis the Pius, as in the time of the Christian Roman and 
Byzantine emperors, the ecclesiastical councils were summoned, authorized, and 
presided over by the prince, to whom the bishops presented the conclusions they had 
reached, not only in matters of discipline but in matters of faith and doctrine as well, 
with the formula: “0 Your Lordship and Emperor! May your wisdom integrate what 
is found lacking, correct what is against reason... .” 7 Almost as in an echo this bears 
witness to the fact that the ancient primacy and an undeniable authority over the 
priesthood, even in matters of wisdom, was attributed to the ruler. The liturgy of 
power, typical of the primordial tradition, still subsists. It was not a pagan, but Bossuet, 
a Catholic bishop (1627-1704), who declared in modem times that the sovereign is 
the “image of God” on earth and who exclaimed: “You are divine though you are 
subject to death, and your authority does not die!” 8 9 

When the priestly caste, however, by virtue of the consecration that it adminis- 
ers demands that the regal authority should recognize the hierarchical superiority 6 
of the priesthood (“unquestionably, a lesser person is blessed by a greater,” Heb. 
7:7) and be subjected to it—such was, in Europe, the Church’s claim during the 
struggle for the investitures—this amounts to a full-blown heresy, totally subversive 
of traditional truths. In reality, as early as in the dark ages of prehistory we can de tect 
the first episodes of the conflict between regal and priestly authority, since they both 
claimed for themselves the primacy that belongs to what is prior and superior to each 
of them. Contrary to common opinion, in the beginning this contrast was not moti¬ 
vated at all by a yearning for political hegemony; the cause of this conflict had a 
deeper root in two opposing spiritual attitudes. According to the prevalent form he 
was destined to assume after the differentiation of dignities, the priest is by defini¬ 
tion always an interpreter and a mediator of the divine: as powerful as he may be, he 
will always be aware of addressing God as his Lord. The sacred king, on the other 
hand, feels that he belongs to the same stock as the gods; he ignores the feeling of 
religious subordination and cannot help but be intolerant of any claim to supremacy 

6. De Coulangcs, Transformations de In roya ute pendant I 'epoque Carolingienne (Paris, 1892). a ! 5-16. The 
Liber pontifical is says: "Post laudes ad Apostolico more antiquorum principum adoratus est. " 

7. We may recall here that it was the emperor Sigismund who summoned the Council of Constance 
(a.d. 1413) on the eve of the Reformation in order to purify the clergy from schisms and anarchy. 

8. Oeuvres oratoircs. 4.362. 

9. This Pauline expression can be contrasted with the symbolism of Jacob who struggles against the angel of 

the Lord and forces him to bless him, (Gen. 32:27). 


advanced by the priesthood. Later times witnessed the emergence of forms of an 
antitraditional anarchy that was manifested mainly in two ways: either as a royalty 
that is a mere temporal power in rebellion against spiritual authority; or as a spiritu¬ 
ality of a “lunar” character in rebellion against a spirituality embodied by kings who 
were still aware of their ancient function. In both instances, heterodoxy was destined 
to emerge from the ruins of the traditional world. The first path will lead to the 
hegemony of the “political” element, the secularization of the idea of the state, the 
destruction of every authentic hierarchy, and last: but not least, to the modem forms 
of an illusory and materialistic virility and power that are destined to be swept away 
by the power of the world of the masses in its col lectivist versions. The second path 
will run parallel to the first; it will initially be manifested through the advent of the 
“civilization of the Mother” and through its pantheist spirituality, and later on through 
the varieties of what constitutes devotional religion. 

The Middle Ages were the theater of the last great episode in the abovementioned 
conflict between the religious universalism represented by the Church and the regal 
ideal, embodied, though not without some compromises, in the Holy Roman Empire. 
According to the regal ideal, the emperor is really the caput ecclesiae, not in the 
sense that he takes the place of the head of the priestly hierarchy (the pope), but in 
the sense that only in the imperial function may the force that is represented by the 
Church and that animates Christianity efficaciously impose its dominion. In this 
context, 

The world, portrayed as a vast unitary whole represented by the Church, 
was perceived as a body in which the single members are coordinated 
under the supreme direction of the Emperor, who is at the same Lime 
the leader of the realm and of the Church . 10 

The emperor, although he was constituted as such by the rite of investiture that 
followed die other investitures relative to his secular aspect of Teutonic prince, claimed 
to have received his right and his power directly from God and claimed to acknowl¬ 
edge only God above himself; therefore the role of the head of the priestly hierarchy 
who had consecrated him could logically be only that of a mere mediator, unable— 
according to the Ghibelline ideal—to revoke by means of excommunication the su¬ 
pernatural force with which the emperor had been endowed. Before the Gregorian 
interpretation subverted the very essence of the ancient symbols, the old tradition 

10. A. Solmi, Stato e Chiesa secondo gli scritti politici da Cnrlomagno a I Concordnto di Worms (Modena, 
1901), 156. For ihe entire duration of the Roman Empire in the East, the Church was always a state 
institution dependent on the emperor, who exercised a universal rule. The beginning of die priestly usur¬ 
pation can be traced back to the declarations of Pope Gel a si us I (ca. 480). 


70 


71 




The World of Tradition 

was upheld in lieu of the fact that the Empire had always and everywhere been 
compared to the sun as the Church had been compared to the moon. Moreover, even 
at the times of her highest prestige, the Church attributed to herself an essentially 
feminine symbolism (that of a mother) in relation to the king, whom she viewed as 
her “son”; the Upanisads’ designation (the brShmana as the mother of the ksatram ) 
appears again in this symbolism, this time in concomitance with the supremacist 
fancies of a gynaecocratic civilization marked by an antiheroic subordination of the 
son to the mother and by an emphasis on the mother’s privileges. After all, based on 
what I have discussed so far, it is clear that the very assumption of the title of pontifex 
maximusby the head of the Christian religion, the pope, turned out to be more or less 
a usurpation, since pontifex magnus was originally a function of the king and of the 
Roman Augustus. Likewise, the characteristic symbols of the papacy, the double 
keys and the ship, were borrowed from the ancient Roman cult of Janus. The papal 
tiara itself derives from a dignity that was not religious or priestly, but essentially 
initiatory, and from the dignity proper of the “Lord of the Center” or of the “sover¬ 
eign of the three worlds.” In all this we can visibly detect a disto.tion and an abusive 
shift of dimension that, although they occurred in a hidden way, are nevertheless 
real and testify to a significant deviation from the pure traditional ideal. 


72 


12 


Universality and Centralism 


T he ideal ol the Holy Roman Empire points out the decadence the principle of 
regere [ruling] is liable to undergo when it loses its spiritual foundation. I will 
here anticipate some of the ideas I intend to develop in the second part of this work. 

In the Ghibelline ideal of the Holy Roman Empire, two beliefs were firmly up¬ 
held: that the regnum had a supernatural origin and a metapolitical and universal 
nature, and that the emperor as the lex animata in ferns and as the peak of the ordinatio 
ad unum, was ahquod ununi quod non est pars (Dante) and the representative of a 
power transcending the community he governed; in the same way the Empire should 
not be contused with any ol the kingdoms and nations that it encompassed, since in 
principle it was something qualitatively other, prior, and superior to each of them. 1 
There was no inconsistency—as some historians would have us believe—in the me¬ 
dieval contrast between the absolute right (above all places, races, and nations) the 
emperor claimed for himself by virtue of having been regularly invested and conse¬ 
crated, and the practical limitations of his material power vis-a-vis the European sov¬ 
ereigns who owed him obedience. The nature of the plane of every universal func¬ 
tion that exercises an all-encompassing unifying action is not a material one; as long 
as such a function does not assert itself as a mere material unity and power, it is wor¬ 
thy of its goals. Ideally speaking, the various kingdoms were not supposed to be united 
to the Empire through a material bond, whether of a political or a military nature, 
but rather through an ideal and spiritual bond, which was expressed by the character¬ 
istic tenn tides, which in Medieval Latin had both a religious meaning and the politi¬ 
cal and moral meaning of “faithfulness” or “devotion.” The tides elevated to the dig¬ 
nity of a sacrament (sacramentum fidelitatis) and the principle of all honor was the 

1- "The tmperor was emit led to [he obedience of Christendom, not ns a hereditary chief of n victorious tribe, 
or feudal lord of a portion ol the earth's surface, but as solemnly invested with an office. Not only did he 
excel in dignity the kings ot the earth: his power was different in its nature; and so, far from supplanting or 
rivalling theirs, rose above them to become the source and needful condition of their authority in their 
several territories, the bond which joined them in one harmonious body.’’James Bryce, The Holy Roman 
Empire (London, ISKb), 114. 


73 




The World of Triiditior 


UmvERSflUTy mid Ceuirhlii 


cement that unified the various feudal communities. “Faithfulness” bound the feudal 
loid to his prince, who was himself a feudal lord ot a higher rank; moreover, in a higher, 
purified, and immaterial form, “faithfulness” was the element required to bring back 
these partial units (singulae comm urinates) to the center of gravity of the Empire, which 
was superior to them all since it enjoyed such a transcendent power and authority that 
it did not need to resort to arms in order to be acknowledged. 

This is also why, in the feudal and imperial Middle Ages, as well as in any other 
civilization of a traditional type, unity and hierarchy were able to coexist with a high 
degree of independence, freedom, and self-expression. 

Generally speaking and especially in typically Aiyan civilizations, there were long 
periods of time in which a remarkable degree ol pluralism existed within every state 
or city. Families, stocks, and gentes made up many small-scale states and powers that 
enjoyed autonomy to a large degree; they were subsumed in an ideal and organic unity, 
though they possessed everything they needed for their material and spiritual life: a cult, 
a law, a land, and a militia. Tradition, the common origin, and the common race (not 
just the race of the body, but the race of the spirit) were the only foundations of a supe¬ 
rior organization that was capable of developing into the form of the Empire, especially 
when the original group of forces spread into a larger space when it needed to be orga¬ 
nized and unified; a typical example is the early history of the Franks. "Frank” was 
synonymous with being free, and the bearer, by virtue of one's race, of a dignity that in 
their own eyes made the Franks superior to all other people: “Fruncus liberdicitur, quia 
super omnes gentes alias decus et dominatio illi debefw”(Turpinus). Up to the ninth 
century, sharing the common civilization of and belonging to the Frank stock were the 
foundations of the state, although there was no organized and centralized political unity 
coextensive with a national territory as in the modem idea of a state. Later on, in the 
Carolingian development that led to establishment of the Empire, Frank nobility was 
scattered everywhere; these separated and highly autonomous units, which still retained 
an immaterial connection with the center, constituted the unifying vital element within 
the overall connection, like cells of the nervous system in relation to the rest of the or¬ 
ganism. The Far Eastern tradition in particular has emphasized the idea that by leav- 
ing the peripheral domain, by not intervening in a direct way, and bv remaining in the 
essential spirituality of the center (like the hub of the wheel effecting its movement), it 
is possible to achieve the “virtue” that characterizes the true empire, as the single indi¬ 
viduals maintain the leeling of being free and everything unfolds in an orderly way. This 
is possible because by virtue of the reciprocal compensation resulting from the invis¬ 
ible direction being followed, the partial disorders or individual wills will eventually 
contribute to the overall order. 2 

2. Tno te Ching, 3, 66. 


This is the basic idea behind any real unity and any authentic authority. On the 
contrary, whenever we witness in history the triumph of a sovereignty and of a unity 
presiding over multiplicity in a merely material, direct, and political way—interven¬ 
ing everywhere, abolishing the autonomy of single groups, leveling in an absolutist 
fashion every right and every privilege, and altering and imposing a common will on 
various ethnic groups—then there cannot be any authentic imperial power since 
what we are dealing with is no longer an organism but a mechanism; this type is best 
represented by the modem national and centralizing states. Wherever a monarch 
has descended to such a lower plane, in other words, wherever he, in losing his 
spiritual function, has promoted an absolutism and a political and material central¬ 
ization by emancipating himself from any bond owed to sacred authority, humiliat¬ 
ing the feudal nobility, and taking over those powers that were previously distributed 
among the aristocracy—such a monarch has dug his own grave, having brought upon 
himself ominous consequences. Absolutism is a short-lived mirage; the enforced 
uniformity paves the way for demagogy, the ascent of the people, or demos, to the 
desecrated throne. 1 This is the case with tyranny, which in several Greek cities re¬ 
placed the previous aristocratic, sacral regime; this is also somewhat the case with 
ancient Rome and with Byzantium in the leveling forms of the imperial decadence; 
and finally, this is the meaning of European political history after the collapse of the 
spiritual ideal of the Holy Roman Empire and the ensuing advent of the secularized, 
nationalist monarchies, up to the age of “totalitarianism'' as a terminal phenomenon. 

It is hardly worth talking about the great powers that arose from the hypertrophy 
of nationalism that was inspired by a barbaric will to power of a militaristic or eco¬ 
nomic type and that people called “empires.” Let me repeat that an empire ls such 
only by virtue of higher values that have been attained by a given race, which first of 
all had to overcome itself and its naturalistic particularities; onLy then will a race be¬ 
come the bearer of a principle that is also present in other peoples endowed with a 
traditional organization, although this principle is present only in a potential form. In 
this instance the conquering material action presents itself as an action that shatters 
the diaphragms of empirical separation and elevates the various potentialities to the 
one and only actuality, thus producing a real unification. Hie principle “die and be¬ 
come,” which resembles being hit by “Apollo’s thunderbolt” (C. Steding), is the el¬ 
ementary requirement for every stock striving to achieve an imperial mission and 
dignity; this is exactly the opposite of the morality of so-called sacred selfishness 
displayed by various nations. To remain limited by national characteristics in order to 
dominate on their basis other peoples or other lands is not possible other than through a 
temporary violence. A hand, as such, cannot pretend to dominate the other organs of 

3. R. Guenon, Autnrite spirituclle ct pouvoir temporal, 112. 


74 


75 





The World of Trodiuoo 


UniVERSflllTD MID (EflTRflllSDl 


tlie body; it can do so, however, by ceasing to be a hand and by becoming sou/, or in 
other words, by rising up again to an immaterial function that is able to unify and to 
diiect the multiplicity of the particular bodily functions, being superior to each one of 
them considered m and of themselves. If the “imperialist” adventures of modem times 
have failed miserably, often bringing to ruin the peoples that promoted them, or if they 
have been transformed into calamities of different kinds, the cause is precisely the 
absence of any authentically spiritual, metapolitical, and metanationalistic element; 
that is replaced instead with the violence of a stronger power that nonetheless is of the 
same nature as those minor powers it attempts to subdue. If an empire is not a sacred 
empite it is not an empire at all, but rather something resembling a cancer within a 
system comprised of the distinct functions of a living organism. 

This is what I think about the degeneration of the idea of regere once it has 
become secularized and separated from the traditional spiritual basis: it is merely a 
temporal and centralizing idea. When considering yet another aspect of this devia¬ 
tion, one will notice that it is typical of all priestly castes to refuse to acknowledge 
the imperial function (as was the case of the Roman Church at the time of the struggle 
ovei the investitures) and to aim at a deconsecration of the concept of state and of 
royalty. Thus, often without realizing it, the priestly caste contributed to the forma¬ 
tion of that lay and “realistic” mentality that unavoidably was destined to rise up 
against priestly authority itself and to ban any of its effective interferences in the 
body of the state. After the fanaticism of the early Christian communities, which 
originally identified the ruling Caesar’s empire with Satan’s kingdom, the greatness 
of the a e tern it at is Romae with the opulence of the Babylonian prostitute, and the 
lictorian conquests with a magnum latrocinium; and after the Augustinian dualism, 
winch contrasted state institutions with the civitas clei and considered the former as 
sinful (corpus diaboli) and unnatural devices—the Gregorian thesis eventually up¬ 
held the doctrine of the so-called natural right in the context of which regal authority 
was divested of every transcendent and divine character and reduced to a mere 
temporal power transferred to the king by the people. According to this thesis, a king 
is always accountable to the people for his power, as eveiy positive state law is 
declared contingent and revocable vis-a-vis that “natural right.” 4 As early as the 
thirteenth century, once the Catholic doctrine of the sacraments was defined, regal 
anointing was discontinued and ceased to be considered, as it had been previously, 
almost on the same level as priestly ordination. Later on, the Society of Jesus often 


-4. I have discussed ,hc real moaning of the primacy of the '•natural law" over the positive and political laws 
(a primacy that is also employed as an ideological weapon by all kinds of subversive movements) in mv 
edition ol selected passages of J. J. Bachofen's Myth . Religion unci Mother Right and in my L 'a rco c h, 


accentuated the antitraditional lay view of royalty (even though they sided with the 
absolutism of those monarchies that were subservient to the Church, the Jesuits in 
some cases went as far as legitimizing regicide 5 ), in order to make it clear that only 
the Church enjoys a sacred character and that therefore every primacy belongs to 
her alone. As I have already mentioned, however, exactly the opposite came time. 
The spirit that was evoked overcame those who evoked it. Once the European states 
became the expressions of popular sovereignty and found themselves governed merely 
by economic principles and by the acephalous organizations (such as the Italian city- 
republics) that the Church had indirectly sponsored in their struggle against imperial 
authority, they became self-subsistent entities. These entities eventually became 
increasingly secularized and relegated everything that had to do with “religion” to 
an increasingly abstract, privatistic, and secondary domain and even used “religion” 
as an instrument to pursue their own goals. 

The Guelph (Gregorian-Thomist) view is the expression of an emasculated spiri¬ 
tuality to which a temporal power is superimposed from the outside in order to 
strengthen it and render it efficient; this view eventually replaced the synthesis of 
spirituality and power, of regal supematurality and centrality typical of the pure 
traditional idea. The Thomist worldview attempted to correct such an absurdity by 
conceiving a certain continuity between state and Church and by seeing in the state 
a “providential” institution. According to this view, the state cannot act beyond a 
certain limit; the Church takes over beyond that limit as an eminently and directly 
supernatural institution by perfecting the overall sociopolitical order and by actualiz¬ 
ing the goal that exceditproportionem naturalis facultatis hunmnne. While this view 
is not too far off from traditional truth, it unfortunately encounters, in the order of 
ideas to which it belongs, an insurmountable difficulty represented by the essential 
difference in the types of relationship with the divine that are proper to regality and 
to priesthood respectively. In order for a real continuity, rather than a hiatus, to exist 
between the two successive degrees of a unitary organization (Scholasticism identi¬ 
fied them with state and Church), it would have been necessary for the Church to 
embody in the supernatural order the same spirit that the imperium , strictly speak¬ 
ing, embodied on the material plane; this spirit is what I have called “spiritual viril¬ 
ity.” The “religious” view typical of Christianity, however, did not a llow for anything 
of this sort; from Pope Gelasius I onward the Church’s claim was that since Christ 
had come, nobody could be king and priest at the same time. Despite her hierocratic 
claims, the Church does not embody the virile (solar) pole of the spirit, but the femi¬ 
nine (lunar) pole. She may lay claim to the key but not to the scepter. Because of her 

5. R. Flllttp-Miller, Segreio della potenza dei Gesuiti (Milan, 1931), 326-33, 


76 


77 



The World of Tradition 


role as mediatrix of the divine conceived theistically, and because of her view of 
spirituality as “contemplative life” essentially different from “active life” (not even 
Dante was able to go beyond this opposition), the Church cannot represent the best 
integration of all particular organizations—that is to say, she cannot represent the 
pinnacle of a great, homogeneous ordinatio ad unum capable of encompassing both 
the peak and the essence of the “providential” design that is foreshadowed, accord¬ 
ing to the abovementioned view, in single organic and hierarchical political unities. 

If a body is free only when it obeys its soul—and not a heterogeneous soul- 
then we must give credit to Frederick II’s claim, according to which the states that 
recognize the authority of the Empire are free, while those states that submit to the 
Church, which represents another spirituality, are the real slaves. 


78 


13 


The Soul of Chivalry 


A s I have previously indicated, not only regality but traditional nobility as well 
was originally characterized by a spiritual element. As we did for regality, let 
us consider the case in which this element is not the natural but rather the acquired 
possession of nobility. It follows that we find a gap analogous to that which exists 
between initiation and investiture. Investiture corresponds to what in the West was 
knightly ordination and to what in other areas was the ritual initiation typical of the 
warrior caste; initiation (a realization of a more direct, individual, and inner nature) 
corresponds to heroic action in a traditional, sacral sense, which is connected to doc¬ 
trines such as that of the "holy war" and of the mors triumplmlis. 

I will discuss the second possibility later. In this context I will only discuss the 
spirit and the mystery of medieval knighthood as an example of the first possibility. 

To begin with, we must be aware of the difference that existed during the Euro¬ 
pean Middle Ages between the feudal and knightly aristocracy. The former was 
connected to a land and to faithfulness (tides) to a given prince. Knighthood, instead, 
appeared as a superterritorial and supemational community in which its members, 
who were consecrated to military priesthood, no longer had a homeland and thus 
were bound by faithfulness not to peopLe but, on the one hand, to an ethics that had as 
its fundamental values honor, truth, courage, and loyalty 1 and, on the other hand, to 
a spiritual authority of a universal type, which was essentially that of the Empire. 
Knighthood and the great knightly orders of the Christian ecumene were an essential 
part of the Empire, since they represented the political and military counterpart of 
what the clergy and the monastic orders represented in the eccl esiastical order. Knight¬ 
hood did not necessarily have a hereditary character: it was possible to become a 

1. Concerning the cult of truth, the knights' oath was “In the name of God, who does not lie!" which corre¬ 
sponded to the Aryan cult of truth. According to this cult, Mithras was the god of all oaths and the Iranian 
mystical “glory” was believed to have departed from King Ytma the first Lime he lied. In The Laws of 
Munu (4.237), we read: "By telling a lie. a sacrifice slips away." 


79 



The World of Iroditioo 


The 5oul of Chivalrei 


Imight as long as the person wishing to become one performed feats that could dem¬ 
onstrate both his heroic contempt for attachment to life as well as the abovementioned 
faithfulness (in both senses of the term). In the older versions of knightly ordination, 
a knight was ordained by another knight without the intervention of priests, almost as 
if in the warrior there was a force “similar to a fluid” that was capable of creating 
new knights by direct transmission; a witness to this practice is found in the Indo- 
Aryan tradition of “warriors ordaining other warriors.” Later on, a special religious 
rite was developed, aimed at ordaining knights. 

This is not all; there is a deeper aspect of European chivalry worth mentioning. 
The knights dedicated their heroic deeds to a woman; this devotion assumed such 
extreme forms in European chivalry that we should regard them as an absurd and 
aberrant phenomenon, if taken literally. To avow unconditional faithfulness to a 
woman was one of the most recurrent themes in chivalrous groups; according to the 
“theology of the castles” there was little doubt that a knight who died for his “woman” 
shared the same promise of blessed immortality achieved by a crusader who had 
died to liberate the Temple. In this content, faithfulness to God and to a woman 
appear to coincide. According to some rituals, the neophyte knight’s “woman” had to 
undress him and lead him to the water, so that he could be purified before being 
ordained. On the other hand, the heroes of daring feats involving a “woman,” such as 
Tristan and Lancelot, are simultaneously knights of King Arthur committed to the 
quest for the Grail, and members of the same order of “heavenly knights” to which 
the Hyperborean “Knight of the Swan” belonged. 

The truth is that behind all this there were esoteric meanings that were not dis¬ 
closed to the judges of the Inquisition or to ordinary folks; thus, these meanings were 
often conveyed in the guise of weird customs and of erotic tales. In a number of 
instances what has been said about the knight’s “woman” also appl ies to the “woman” 
celebrated by the Ghibelline “Love’s Lieges,” 2 which points to a uniform and pre¬ 
cise tiaditional symbolism. The woman to whom a knight swears unconditional faith¬ 
fulness and to whom even a crusader consecrates himself; the woman who leads to 
purification, whom the knight considers his reward and who wil I make him immortal 
if he ever dies for her that woman, as it has been documented in the case of the 
“Worshipers of Love” or “Love’s Lieges,” is essentially a representation of “Holy 
Wisdom,” or a perceived embodiment, in different degrees, of the “transcendent, 
divine woman” who represents the power of a transfiguring spirituality and of a life 
unaffected by death. This motif, in turn, is part of a complete traditional system; 
there is, in fact, a vast cycle of sagas and myths in which the “woman” is portrayed 

2. SeeJ.Evola, The Yoga o/ Power, trans, Guido Stucco (Rochester, Vt., 1993). 205-9; and J. Evola, Eros and 
(he Mysteries of Love: The Me tu physics of Sex (Rochester, Vt., 1983), 195-202, 


according to this value. The same theme runs through the stories of Hebe, a peren¬ 
nial youth who becomes the spouse of the hero Heracles in the Olympian domain; of 
Idun (whose name means “rejuvenation,” “renewal”) and of Gunnlocl, holder of the 
magic potion Odhaerir, who attempt in vain to attain Freya, goddess of light, who is 
constantly yearned for by “elemental beings”; of Brynhild, whom Odin appoints as 
the earthly bride of a hero who will dare go through the flickering flame surrounding 
her hall; 2 of the woman of the “Land of the Living” and of the “Victorious One” 
(Boagad) who attracts the Gaelic hero Conall Ceamach; of the Egyptian women 
who offer the “key of life” and the lotus of resurrection; of the Aztec Teoya-miqui 
who leads the fallen warriors to the “House of the Sun”; of the “well-shaped, strong, 
and tail-formed maidens who make the soul of the righteous go above the Kivad 
bridge and who place it in the presence of the heavenly gods themselves”; 4 of Ardvi 
Sura Anahita, “strong and holy, who proceeds from the god of light,” and of whom 
one asks for “the glory which belongs to the Aryan race and to the holy Zarathustra,” 
as well as wisdom and victory; 5 of the “bride” of Gesar, the Tibetan hero, who is an 
emanation of “the conquering Dolma,” not without relation to the double meaning of 
the Sanskrit term sakti, which means both “bride” and “power”; to the fravashi, di¬ 
vine women who, like the Valkyrie, are simultaneously transcendental parts of the 
human soul and beings who “bestow victory on those who invoke them, favors on 
those who love them, health on those who are ill.” 6 This theme helps us to penetrate 
the esoteric dimension of some of the chivalrous literature about the “woman” and 
her cult. In the Indo-Aryan tradition it is said: 

Verily, not for love of ksatrahood Lin a material sense] is ksatrahood 
dear, but for love of the soul [the principle of the Self which is “light 
and immortality”! ksatrahood is dear. , . Ksatrahood has deserted him 
who knows ksatrahood in anything else but the Soul . 7 

The same idea may constitute the background of the particular aspect of chivalry 
that I have considered in this context. 

3. This is mentioned in the Eddns: Gylfngioning, 26, 42; Hnviimnl, 105; Sigrdifiiival. 4-8. Gunnlocl, like the 
Hellenic Hespcrides, is the keeper of the golden fruit and of a divine potion, Sigrdifa, contrasted with 
Sigurd who “awakens” her, appears as a woman endowed with wisdom; she imparts to the hero the knowl¬ 
edge of the runes of victory. Finally we may recall in the Teutonic tradition the “wondrous woman” 
waiting on a mountain for "the hero who shines like the sun,” and who will live forever with her. The ring 
of fire around the sleeping “woman” recalls the barrier that according to the Christian myth blocked the 
entrance to Eden after Adam’s fall (Gen. 3:24). 

4. They arc the fm vnshi described in Vendidnd, 19.30. 

5. Vas/ma, 10.7. 

6. Yrisht, 12.23-24. 

7. Brhad-firanynki] Upanisnd, 2,5-6. 


80 


81 



The World of Traditioo 


The Soul of Chivrlru 


It is important to note that in some cases the symbolism of the “woman” may 
assume a negative, “gynaecocratic” character (see chapter 27) that is different from 
the character related to the core of chivalry that leads to the ideal of “spiritual viril¬ 
ity” mentioned in the previous chapter. The persistent, repeated use of feminine 
characters, which is typical of cycles of a heroic type, in reality means nothing else 
but this: even when confronting the power that may enlighten him and lead him to 
something more than human, the only ideal of the hero and of the knight is that 
active and affirmative attitude that in every normal civilization characterizes a true 
man as opposed to a woman. This is the “mystery” that in a more or less hidden form 
has shaped a part of the chivalrous medieval literature and that was familiar to the 
so-called Courts of Love, since it was able to confer a deeper meaning to the often 
debated question whether a “woman” ought to prefer a “cleric” or a “knight.” s 

Even the odd declarations of some chiva lrous codes, according to which a knight 
(who is believed to have a semi-priestly dignity or to be a “heavenly knight”) has the 
right to make other people’s women his own, including the women of his own sover¬ 
eign, as long as he proves to be the strongest, and according to which the possession 
of a woman ’ automatically derives from his victory—must be related to the mean¬ 
ings that I have discussed in the context of expounding the saga of the King of the 
Woods of Nemi, described in chapter 1. 

We are entering here into an order of real experiences, and thus we must re¬ 
nounce the idea that these are just inoperative and abstract symbols. I must refer my 
readers to another work of mine, The Metaphysics of Sex? where I said that the 
"initiatory woman” or “secret woman” could be evoked in a real woman; in this book 
[ also explained that Eros, love, and sex were known and employed according to 
iheir real transcendent possibilities. Such possibilities were hinted at by several tra¬ 
ditional teachings, so much so as to define a special path leading to the effective 
removal of the limitations of the empirical self and to the participation in higher 
forms of being. Existentially, the nature of the warrior was such as to present eventu¬ 
ally a qualification foi this path. I cannot, however, develop this point any further in 
this context. 

Mateiialized and scattered fragments of an ancient symbolism are also found in 
othei cases, such as the fact that the title of “knight” confers a special prestige and 
that the knight is in some cases so close to his horse that he shares both danger and 
glory with it and may become ritually demoted from his rank when he allows himself 

8. Rieolfi (Studi sui fecleli d'amore [Milan, 1933]) remarked that “in the thirteenth century the divine intel¬ 
lect is usually portrayed in feminine, not masculine terms”: it is called Wisdom, knowledge, or "Our Lady 
Intelligence.” In some figurations the symbol of what is active was attributed to man; this expresses an 
ideal corresponding to the path of a ‘'warrior” rather than that of a "cleric.” 

9. See note 2 above. 


to be unsaddled. These facts may lead us beyond the merely material dimension, 
and may be related to other filiations of the ancient symbolism of the horse. The 
horse appears in the famous myths of Perseus and Bellerophon as a winged creature 
capable of taking to the sky, the riding of which constitutes a test for divine heroes. 
The symbolism becomes more evident in the Platonic myth where the outcome of 
the choice between the white and the black horse determines the transcendental 
destiny of the soul, represented by the charioteer, 10 and also in the myth ofPhaethon, 
who was flung into the river Eridanus by his horse’s driving force as it drove the sun 
chariot through the sky. In its traditional association with Poseidon, the god of the 
fluid element, the horse played the role of a symbol of the elementary life-force; 
even in its relation with Mars—another equestrian god of classical antiquity—the 
horse was the expression of the same force, which in ancient Rome was subjected to 
the warrior principle. The meaning of two representations, which in this context have 
a particular importance, will now become clear. First, in some classical figurations 
the “hero-like” soul that was transfigured or made was presented as a knight or 
accompanied by a horse. 11 The second figuration is the so-called Kalki-avatara: ac¬ 
cording to the Indo-Aryan tradition, the force that will put an end to the “dark era” 
(Kali Yuga) will be embodied in the form of a white horse; it will destroy the evil 
people and particularly the mlecchas, who are warriors demoted in rank and disjoined 
from the sacred. 1 ' The coming of the Kalki-avatara to punish these people inaugu¬ 
rates the restoration of primordial spirituality. In another occasion, it would be inter¬ 
esting to follow the threads of these symbolical motifs from the Roman world all the 
way to the Middle Ages. 

On a more relative and historical plane, European aristocratic chivalry enjoyed 
a formal institution through the rite of ordination as it was defined around the twelfth 
century. Following two seven-year periods in the service of a prince (from ages 
seven to fourteen, and then from fourteen to twenty-one), in which the youth was 
supposed to prove his loyalty, faithfulness, and bravery, the rite of ordination took 
place at a date that coincided with Easter or Pentecost, n thus suggesting the idea of 

10. Plato, Phnedrus. 264b. 

11. This is certainly the case of the bas-reliefs of Tanagris and Tire a; in the latter the soul, wearing nothing 
but a regal mantle, holds the horse by the bridle; nearby there is the very significant symbol of the tree 
with a serpent. 

12. Visnu Purdnn 4.3.24. 

13. On the Easter date, which was not chosen arbitrarily by Christians, and much earlier than the times of 
Jesus, many populations used to celebrate the rile of the "kindling of fire”; this was an element related to 
several traditions of a "solar” type. Concerning the two periods of seven years in the knightly novitiate, 
we should recall that a similar rhythm was followed in ancient Greece (Plato, Alcibiadcs. I. I21e) and not 
without reason: according to a traditional teaching, the number seven presided over the rhythms of the 
development of those forces acting within man and nature. 


82 


83 




The World of taion 


The Soul of (.mm 


a resurrection or of a “descent of the Spirit.” First came a period of fasting and 
penance, followed by a symbolic purification through a bath, so that, according to 
Redi, “these knights may lead a new life and follow new habits.” Secondly (at times, 
this came first) came the “wake in arms”: the person to be initiated spent the night in 
the church and prayed standing up or on his knees (sitting was strictly prohibited), so 
that God may help him achieve what was lacking in his preparation. Following the 
example of the neophytes of the ancient Mysteries, after the ritual bathing, the knight 
took on a white robe as a symbol of his renewed and purified nature; sometimes he 
even wore a black vest, reminding him of the dissolution of mortal nature, and a red 
garment, which alluded to the deeds he was supposed to undertake at the cost of 
shedding his blood. 1,1 Third came the priestly consecration of the arms that were laid 
on the altar and that concluded the rite by inducing a special spiritual influence that 
was supposed to sustain the “new life” of the warn or, who was now elevated to 
knightly dignity and turned into a member of the universal order represented by 
knighthood. 15 In the Middle Ages we witness a blossoming of treatises in which ev¬ 
ery weapon of the knight was portrayed as a symbol of spiritual or ethical virtues; 
symbols that were almost intended to remind him of these virtues in a visible way 
and to connect any chivalrous deed with an inner action. 

It would be easy to indicate the counterpart of this in the mysticism of weapons 
found in other traditional civilizations. I will limit myself to the example of the Japa¬ 
nese warrior aristocracy, which considered the sword (katana) an a sacred object. In 
Japan, the making ol a sword followed precise, unbreakable rules; when a black¬ 
smith fabricated a sword, he had to wear ceremonial robes and to purify the forge. 
The technique for ensuring the sharpness of a blade was kept absolutely secret, and 
it was transmitted only from master to disciple. The blade of a sword was the symbol 
of the soul of the samurai ,h and the use of such a weapon was sub ject to precise rules; 
likewise, to train in its use and in the use of other weapons (such as the bow), be¬ 
cause of then ielation with Zen, could plunge a person into an initiatory dimension. 

In the list of knightly virtues given by Redi, first came wisdom followed by 
f aithlulness, liberality, and strength. According to a legend, Roland was an expert in 
theological science; he was portrayed engaging in a theological discussion with his 

14. These three colors, sometimes found in the symbolism of three robes, are central in the Hermetic Ars 
Rc«ia since they represent the three moments of the initiatory palingenesis; the '‘red" corresponds to 
“Gold” and to the "Sun." 

IT If the term ucloubler employed in the knightly ordination derives from the Anglo-Saxon dubbun, “to 
strike” (in reference to the violent blow the consecrating person inflicted on the knight-to-be), this prob¬ 
ably symbolizes the ritual ‘•mortification’ that the human nature of the knight had to undergo prior 10 
sharing in the superior nature, In the secret language of the “Love’s Lieges" we find mention of ■‘being 
wounded” or “hit by death” or by Love or by the vision of the “Woman.” 

16. [Inazo Nitobe, Bushido: The Warrior’s Code. (Burbank, Calif., 1975), 82-87.] 


enemy Ferragus, before combat. Godfrey of Bullion was called by some of his con¬ 
temporaries lux nionarchorum; Hugh of Tabaria, in his Ordene de Chevalrie por¬ 
trayed the knight as an “armed priest,” who by virtue of his two dignities (military 
and priestly), has the right to enter a church and to keep the order in it with his sacred 
sword. 17 In the Indo-Aryan tradition we see members of the warrior aristocracy com¬ 
peting victoriously in wisdom with the brahmana (that is, with the representatives of 
the priestly caste, for example Ajatasatru vs. Gargya Balaki; Pravahana Jaivali vs. 
Aruni; Sanatkumara vs. Narada, etc.); becoming brahmana, or, just like other brah¬ 
mana, being “those who tend to the sacred flame.” 18 This con.fimas the inner charac¬ 
ter of chivalry and, in a wider sense, of the warrior caste in the world of Tradition. 

With the decline of chivalry, the European nobility also eventually lost the spiri¬ 
tual element as a reference point for its highest “faithfulness,” and thus became part 
of merely political organisms as in the case of the aristocracies of the national states 
that emerged after the collapse of the civilization of the Middle Ages. The principles 
of honor and of faithfulness continued to exist even when the noble was nothing but 
a “king’s officer”; but faithfulness is blind when it does not refer, even in a mediated 
way, to something beyond the human dimension. Thus the qualities that were pre¬ 
served in the European nobility through heredity eventually underwent a fatal de¬ 
generation when they were no longer renewed in their original spirit; the decline of 
the regal spirituality was unavoidably followed by the decline of nobility itself, and 
by the advent of the forces found in a lower order. 

1 have mentioned that chivalry, both in its spirit and in its ethics, is an organic 
part of the empire and not of the Church. It is true that the knight almost always 
included in his vows the defense of the faith. This should be taken as the generic sign 
of a militant commitment to something superindividual, rather than a conscious pro¬ 
fession of faith in a specific and theological sense. Just by scraping a little bit off the 
surface, it becomes evident that the strongest “trunks” of the sprouting of knighthood 
derived their “sap” from orders and movements that had the odor of heresy to the 
Church, to the point of being persecuted by her. Even from a traditional point of 
view, the doctrines of the Albigenses cannot be considered to be perfectly orthodox; 
however, we cannot fail to notice, especially in reference to Frederick II and to the 
Aragonenses, a certain connection between the Albigenses and a current of chivalry 
that defended the imperial ideal against the Roman Curia, and which during the 

17. Among ihe twelve palatines there was an armed priest, the bishop Turpinus. He invented the- war cry: 
“Glory be to our nobility, Monljoie!” See also the legendary journey of King Arthur through Montjoie 
before he was solemnly crowned in Rome; it is highly significant that the real etymology of the word 
Montjoie was Mons Jovis, or Mount Olympus (this etymology was suggested to ine by R. Guenon). 

L8. VTsnu Purdna 4,2,19. 


84 


85 



The World oe Tradition 


The Soul oe Chivalro 


Crusades ventured all the way to Jerusalem (not without a reason), which it con¬ 
ceived almost as the center of a higher spirituality than that which was incarnated in 
papal Rome. 

The most characteristic case is that of the Knights Templar, ascetic warriors 
who gave up the pleasures of the world in order to pursue a discipline not practiced in 
the monasteries but on the battlefields, and who were animated by a faith conse¬ 
crated more by blood and victory than by prayer. The Templars had their own secret 
initiation, the details of which, though they were portrayed by their accusers with 
blasphemous tinges, are very significant. Among other things, in a preliminary pan 
of the ritual the candidates to the highest degree of Templar initiation were supposed 
to reject the symbol of the cross and to acknowledge that Christ’s doctrine did not 
lead to salvation. The Templars were also accused of engaging in secret dealings 
with the '‘infidels” and of celebrating wicked rites. These were just symbols, as it 
was declared repeatedly, though in vain, at the Templars’ trial. In all probability, this 
was not a case of sacrilegious impiety but of acknowledgment of the inferior charac¬ 
ter of the exoteric tradition represented by devotional Christianity, an acknowledg¬ 
ment that was required in order for one to be elevated to higher forms of spirituality. 
Generally speaking, as somebody has correctly remarked, the very name ‘Templars” 
bespeaks transcendence. “Temple” is a more august, comprehensive, and inclusive 
term than “church.” The temple dominates the church. Churches fall in ruins, but the 
temple stands as a symbol of the kinship of religions and of the perennial spirit in¬ 
forming themT 

The Grail was another characteristic reference point of chivalry.* 1 The saga of 
the Grail closely reflects the hidden ambition of the Ghibelline knights; this saga too 
has hidden motifs that cannot be ascribed to the Church or to Christianity alone. Not 
only does the official Catholic tradition not acknowledge the Grail, but the essential 
elements of the saga are related to pre-Christian and even Nordic-Hyperborean 
traditions. In this context I can only remind the reader that in the most important 
versions of the legend, the Grail is portrayed as a stone (stone of light and “luciferian 

19. Concerning ihe eihos of the Knights Templar, in his De laude novae militiae (chap. 4}, Saint Bernard 
wrote: "They live in pleasant fellowship in a frugal way, without getting married, begetting children or 
owning a thing of their own, including their will. . . . Usually they do not wear fancy clothes; they are 
covered with dust, their faces burnt by the sun, with a proud and severe look in their eyes. When prepar¬ 
es r °r battle they arm themselves with faith in the inside and with iron on the outside, without wearing 
adorned insignia or putting beautiful saddles on their horses. Their only decorations are their weapons 
which they use with bravery in the greatest dangers, without fearing the number or the strength of the 
enemy. They put all their trust in the Lord of Hosts, and as they fight for Him, they seek either a certain 
victory or a holy and honored death on the battlefield,” 

20. See my work, II mistcro del Graal c l’idea imperiale ghibellina. 


stone”) rather than as a mystical chalice; that the adventures related to the Grail, 
almost without exception, have a more heroic and initiatory rather than a Christian 
and eucharistic character; that Wolfram von Eschenbach refers to the Knights of the 
Grail as “Templeise”; and finally that the Templar insignia (a red cross on a white 
background) is found on the garment of some of the Grail knights and on the sail of 
the ship on which Perlesvaux (Parsifal) leaves, never to return. It is worth noting that 
even in the most Christianized versions of the saga one still finds extra-ecclesial 
references. It is said that the Grail as a bright chalice (the presence of which pro¬ 
duces a magical animation, a foreboding, and an anticipation of a nonhuman life), 
following the Last Supper and Jesus’ death, was taken by angels into heaven from 
where it is not supposed to return until the emergence on earth of a stock of heroes 
capable of safeguarding it. The leader of this stock instituted an order of “perfect” or 
“heavenly knights,” dedicated to this puipose. The “myth” and the highest ideal of 
medieval chivalry was to reach the Grail in its new earthly abode and to belong to 
such an order, which was often identified with King Arthur’s knights of the Round 
Table. Considering that the Catholic Church has descended directly and without any 
interruptions from primitive Christianity, and considering the fact that the Christian¬ 
ized Grail disappeared until that lime a knightly rather than priestly order was to be 
instituted—this obviously testifies to the emergence of a different tradition than the 
Catholic and apostolic one. There is more: in almost all the texts dealing with the 
Grail, the symbol of the “temple” (still a very priestly one) is abandoned in favor of 
the symbol of the court or of a regal castle, as the mysterious, inaccessible, and well- 
protected place in which the Grail is kept. The central theme of the “mystery” of the 
Grail, besides the test of mending a broken sword, consists in a regal restoration; 
there is the expectation of a knight who will restore the prestige of a decadent realm 
and who will avenge or heal a king who is either wounded, paralyzed, or in a catatonic 
state. Crisscrossing references connect these themes both to the imperial myth and to 
the very idea of a supreme, invisible, and “polar” center of die world. It is obvious 
that in this cycle, which was important to the medieval chivalrous world, a particular 
tradition was at work. This tradition had little to do with that of the dominant religion, 
and although it occasionally adopted some elements from Christianity, maybe it did 
so the better to express, or conversely, to hide itself. The Grail is truly a myth of the 
“regal religion” that confirms what has been said about the secret soul of chivalry. 

When looking at the outer domain relative to a general view of life and of eth¬ 
ics, the overall scope of the formative and conecting action that Christianity under¬ 
went because of the world of chivalry must be acknowledged. Christianity could not 
reconcile itself with the ethos of chivalry and espouse the idea of a “holy war” other 
than by betraying the principles of that dualistic and escapist spirituality that charac- 


86 


87 





terized it over and against the traditional and cJassical world. Christianity had to 
forget Augustine’s words: “Those who can think of war and endure it without expe¬ 
riencing great sufferings have truly lost their sense of humanity”; the more radical 
expressions of Tertullian and his warning: “The Lord, by ordering Peter to put the 
sword back into the scabbard, has thereby disarmed soldiers”; 21 the martyrdom of 
saints Maximilian and Theogon, who preferred to die rather than to serve in the 
army; and Saint Martin’s words prior to battle: “I am a soldier of Christ; I am not 
allowed to draw the sword.” Christianity also had to bestow on the chivalrous prin¬ 
ciple of honor a very different understanding than what the Christian principle of 
love could allow for; moreover, it had to conform to a type of morality that was more 
heroic and pagan than evangelical. It also had to “close an eye” to expressions such 
as John of Salisbury’s: “The military profession, both worthy and necessary, has 
been instituted by God himself”; and it even had to come to see war as a possible 
asceticaj and immortalizing path. 

Moreover, it was thanks to this very deviation of the Church from the main 
themes of primitive Christianity that during the Middle Ages Europe came to know 
the last image of a world that in many aspects was of a traditional type. 


21, Augustine, The City of God , 19.7; Tertullian, De corona, 1) 


14 


The Doctrine of the Castes 


T he caste system is one of the main expressions of the traditional sociopolitical 
order, a “form” victorious over chaos and the embodiment of the metaphysical 
ideas of stability and justice. The division of individuals into castes or into equivalent 
groups according to their nature and to the different rank of activities they exercise 
with regard to pure spirituality is found with the same traits in all higher forms of 
traditional civilizations, and it constitutes the essence of the primordial legislation 
and of the social order according to “justice.” Conformity to one’s caste was consid¬ 
ered by traditional humanity as the first and main duty of an individual. 

The most complete type of caste hierarchy, the ancient Indo-Aryan system, was 
visibly inspired by the hierarchy of the various functions found in a physical organ¬ 
ism animated by the spirit. At the lower level of such an organism there are the 
undifferentiated and impersonal energies of matter and of mere vitality; the regulat¬ 
ing action of the functions of the metabolism and of the organism is exercised upon 
these forces. These functions, in turn, are regulated by the will, which moves and 
directs the body as an organic whole in space and time. Finally, we assume the soul 
to be the center, the sovereign power and the “light” of the entire organism. The 
same is true for the castes; the activities of the slaves or workers (sudrns) were 
subordinated to the activities of the bourgeoisie (vaisyn); higher up in the hierarchy 
we find the warrior nobility (ksatriya); and finally the representatives of the spiritual 
authority and power (the bnlhmana, in the original sense of the word, and the leaders 
as ponti frees). These groups were arranged in a hierarchy that corresponded to the 
hierarchy of the functions within a living organism. 

Such was the Jndo-Aryan sociopolitical system, which closely resembled the 
Persian system; the latter was articulated into the four pi slum of the Lords of fire 
(athreva), of the warriors (ratbaestha ), of the heads of the family (vastriya-fshuyant% 
and of the serfs assigned to manual labor (huti). An analogous pattern was found in 
other civilizations up to the European Middle Ages, which followed the division of 
people into servants, burghers, nobility and clergy. In the Platonic worldview, the 


89 



The World of Tradition 


The Doctriiie of the Castes 


castes corresponded to different powers of tire soul and to particular virtues: the 
rulers (apyovieq), the warriors (QvfaxKegovemxovpoi) and the workers (demiurgoi) 
corresponded respectively to the spirit (vovg) and to the head, to the animus 
(OvgoiSeg) and to the chest, and to the faculty of desire (EmOvprjnKOv) and to the 
lower organs of the body regulating sex and the functions of excretion. In this way, 
as stated by Plato, the external order and hierarchy correspond to an inner order and 
hierarchy according to “justice/ 11 The idea of organic correspondence is also found 
in the well-known Vedic simile of the generation of the various castes from the 
distinct parts of the “primordial man 1 ' or purusa. 2 

The castes, more than defining social groups, defined functions and typical ways 
of being and acting. The correspondence of the fundamental natural possibilities of 
the single individual to any of these functions determined his or her belonging to the 
corresponding caste. Thus, in the duties toward one’s caste (each caste was tradi¬ 
tionally required to perform specific duties), the individual was able to recognize the 
normal explication as well as the development and the chrism of his or her own 
nature 3 within the overall order imposed “from above."This is why the caste system 
developed and was applied in the traditional world as a natural, agreeable institution 
based on something that everybody regarded as obvious, rather than on violence, 
oppression, or on what in modern terms is referred to as “social injustice." By ac¬ 
knowledging his own nature, traditional man knew his own place, function, and 
what would be the correct relationship with both superiors and inferiors; lienee, if a 
vaisya did not acknowledge the authority of a ksntriyn, or if a ksntriyu did not uphold 
his superiority in regards to a vnisyn or a sudm, this was not so much considered a 
fault but as the result of ignorance. A hierarchy was not a device of the human will 
but a law of nature and as impersonal a physical law as that according to which a 
lighter fluid floats on top of a denser fluid, unless an upsetting factor intervenes. 
There was a firmly upheld principle according to which “Those who want to insti¬ 
tute a process at variance with human nature cannot make it function as an ethical 
system/' 4 

What upsets modem sensitivity the most about the caste system is the law of 


1. Justice is produced in the soul, like health in the body, bv establishing the elements concerned in their 
natural relations of control and subordination; whereas injustice is like disease and means that this natural 
order is inverted.” Plato, Republic, trails. B. Jowett, 444a, b. 

2. Rg Veda 10.90.10-12. This fourfold division became a threefold division when nobility was thought to 
encompass both the warrior and the spiritual dimensions and practiced in those areas in which residues of 
this original situation existed. This division corresponds to the Nordic division into jarls, knrls, and iraells 
and to the Hellenistic division into eupatrids, gheomors, and demiurge 

3. BlmgiivadgTtS{\$A\): “The works of Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras are different in harmony 
with the three powers of their bom nature. 1 ' The Bhngiivud Gita, trans J. Mascarb (New York, 1962). 

4. Chuug-yung, J3.1. Plato defined the concept of “justice” along similar lines ( Republic , 432d, 434c). 


heredity and preclusion. It seems “unfair” that fate may seal at birth one’s social 
status and predetermine the type of activity to which a man will consecrate the rest 
of his life and which he will not be able to abandon, not even in order to pursue an 
inferior one, lest he become an “outcast," a pariah shunned by everybody. 

When seen against the background of the traditional view of life, however, these 
difficulties are overcome. The closed caste system was based on two fundamental 
principles: the first principle consisted of the fact that traditional man considered 
everything visible and worldly as the mere effects of causes of a higher order. Thus, 
for example, to be born according to this or that condition, as a man or a woman, in 
one caste rather than in another, in one race instead of another, and to be endowed 
with specific talents and dispositions, was not regarded as pure chance. All of these 
circumstances were explained by traditional man as corresponding to the nature of 
the principle embodied in an empirical self, whether willed or already present tran- 
scendentally in the act of undertaking human birth. Such is one of the aspects of the 
Hindu doctrine of karma; although this doctrine does not coirespond to what is com¬ 
monly meant by “reincarnation," 5 it still implies the generic idea of the preexistence 
of causes and the principle that “human beings are heirs of karma." Similar doctrines 
were not typical of the East alone. According to a Hellenistic teaching, not only “the 
soul’s quality exists before any bodily life; it has exactly what it chose to have," but 
“the body has been organized and determined by the image of the soul which is in 
it." f ' Also, according to some Persian-Aryan views that eventually found their way to 
Greece and then to ancient Rome, the doctrine of sacred regality was connected to 
the view that souls are attracted by certain affinities to a given planet corresponding 
to the predominant qualities and to the rank of human birth; the king was considered 
domus natus precisely because he was believed to have followed the path of solar 
influences. 7 Those who love “philosophical" explanations should remember that 
Kant’s and Schopenhauer’s theory concerning the “intelligible character" (the 
“noumenal” character that precedes the phenomenal world) relates to a similar or¬ 
der of ideas. 

3. The idea that the same personal principle or spiritual nucleus has already lived in previous human lives and 
that it will continue to do so ought to he rejected, R. Guenon Launched a devastating critique of this idea in 
his L ’Erretir:spirite (Paris, 1923). 1 followed suit in my The Doctrine of Awakening. Historically, the belief 
in reincarnation is related to the Weltanschauung typical of the substratum of pre-Aryan races and of the 
influence exercised by them; from a doctrinal point of view it is a simple popular myth, and not the 
expression of an “esoteric” knowledge. In the Vedas the idea of reincarnation is not found at all. 

6. Plotinus, Ennends, 3.4.3; 1.1.1. Plato wrote: “No guardian spirit will cast lots for you, but you shall choose 

your own destiny. Let him to whom the first lot falls choose first a life to which he will be bound of 
necessity.” Republic , 6J7e. 

7. See Plato’s Phnedrus. 10.15-16, 146—48b; and Emperor Julian’s Hymn to King Helios, 131b, However, the 

nature of the elements that determine a given birth is as complex as the nature of the elements that 
constitutes a human being, who is the sum of various legacies. See my Doctrine of Awakening. 


90 


91 



The World of Truditioo 


The DocTRinc op the Castes 


And so, given these premises and excluding the idea that birth is a casual event, 
the doctrine of the castes appears under a very different light. It can be said therefore 
that birth does not determine nature, but that nature detemnines birth; more specifi¬ 
cally, a person is endowed with a certain spint by virtue of being bom in a given 
caste, but at the same time, one is born in a specific caste because one possesses, 
transcendentally, a given spirit. Hence, the differences between the castes, far from 
being artificial, unfair, and arbitrary, were just the reflection and the confirmation of 
a preexisting, deeper, and more intimate inequality; they represented a higher appli¬ 
cation of the principle suum cuique. 

In the context of a living tradition, the castes represented the natural “place” of 
the earthly convergence of analogous wills and vocations; also, the regular and closed 
hereditary transmission forged a homogeneous group sharing favorable organic, vi- 
talistic, and even psychic proclivities in view of the regular development on the part 
of single individuals of the aforesaid prenatal determinations or dispositions on the 
plane of human existence. The individual did not “receive” from the caste his own 
nature; rather, the caste afforded him the opportunity to recognize or remember his 
own nature and prenatal will, while at the same time presenting him with a kind of 
occult heritage related to the blood so that he would be able to realize the latter in a 
harmonious way. The characteristics, the functions, and the duties of the caste con¬ 
stituted the traces for the regular development of one’s possibilities in the context of 
an organic social system. In the higher castes, initiation completed this process by 
awakening and inducing in the single individual certain influences that were already 
oriented in a supernatural direction/ The ius of the single individual, namely, those 
prerogatives and distinct rights inherent to each of these traditional articulations, not 
only allowed this transcendental will to be in harmony with a congenial human he¬ 
redity, but also allowed everybody to find in the social organism a condition that 
really corresponded to their own nature and to their deepest attitudes; such a condi¬ 
tion was protected against any confusion and prevarication. 

When the sense of personality is not focused on the ephemeral principle of hu¬ 
man individuality, which is destined to leave behind nothing but a “shadow” at death, 
all this seems very natural and evident. It is true that much can be “achieved” in a 
lifetime, but “achievements” mean absolutely nothing from a higher point of view 
(from a point of view that knows that the progressive decay of the organism will 
eventually push one into nothingness) when they do not actualize the preexisting 
will that is the reason fora specific birth; such a prenatal will cannot be easily altered 

8. “Just us good seed, sown in a good Held, culminates in a birth, so the son bom from an Aryan lather in an 
Aryan mother deserves every transformative ritual, . . . Seed sown in the wrong field perishes right, inside 
it; and a field by itself with no seed also remains barren. 1 ' 77)e Laws ot'Mnnu. It).69.71. 


by a temporary and arbitrary decision taken at a given point of one’s earthly journey. 
Once this is understood, the necessity of the castes will become clear. The only 
“self” modem man knows and is willing to acknowledge is the empirical self that 
begins at birth and is more or less extinguished at death. Everything is reduced by 
him to the mere human individual since in him all prior recollections have disap¬ 
peared. Thus we witness the disappearance of both the possibility of establishing 
contact with those forces of which a given birth is just the effect, and the possibility 
of rejoining that nonhuman el ement in man, which being situated before birth, is also 
beyond death; this element constitutes the “place” for everything that may eventu¬ 
ally be realized beyond death itself and is the principle of an incomparable sense of 
security. Once the rhythm has been broken, the contacts lost, and the great distances 
precluded to the human eye, all the paths seem open and every field is saturated 
with disorderly, inorganic activities that lack a deep foundation and meaning and are 
dominated by temporal and particularistic motivations and by passions, cheap inter¬ 
ests, and vanity. In this context, “culture” is no longer the context in which it is pos¬ 
sible to actualize one’s being through serious commitment and faithfulness; it is rather 
the locus for “self-actualization.” And since the shifting sands of that nothingness 
without a name and tradition that is the empirical human subject have become the 
foundation of that self-actualization, the claim to equality and the right to be, as a 
matter of principle, anything one chooses to be is therefore earned forward and strenu¬ 
ously advocated in modern society. No other difference is acknowledged to be more 
right and truer than that which is “achieved” through one’s efforts and “merit” ac¬ 
cording to the terms of various vain, intellectual, moral, or social beliefs typical of 
these recent times. In the same way, it is only natural that the only things left are the 
limits of the most coarse physical heredity, which have become the signs of incom¬ 
prehensible meanings and which are endured or enjoyed according to each case, as 
a caprice of fate. It is also natural that personality and blood traits, social vocation 
and function are all elements that have become increasingly discordant to the point 
of generating states of real, tragic, inner and outer conflict; from a legal and ethical 
perspective, they have also led to a qualitative destruction, to a relative leveling, to 
equal rights and duties, and to an equal social morality that pretends to be imposed 
on everyone and to be valid for all people in the same way, with total disregard for 
single natures and for different inner dignities. The “overcoming” of the castes and 
of the traditional sociopolitical orders has no other meaning. The individual has 
achieved all his “freedom”; his “chain” is not short, and his intoxication and his 
illusions as a restless puppet have no limits. 

The freedom enjoyed by the man of Tradition was something very different. It 
did not consist in discarding but in being able to rejoin the deeper vein of his will, 


92 


93 



The World of Trhditioh 


The DoCTRinc of the Castes 


which was related to the mystery of his own existential “form.” In reality, that which 
corresponds to birth and to the physical element of a being reflects what can be 
called, in a mathematical sense, the resultant [the vectorial sum] of the various forces 
or tendencies at work in his birth; in other words, it reflects the direction of the stron¬ 
ger force. In this force there may be inclinations of minor intensity that have been 
swept away and that correspond to talents and tendencies that on the plane of indi¬ 
vidual consciousness are distinct from both their own organic preformation and the 
duties and environment of one’s caste. These instances of inner contradiction within 
a traditional political order regulated by the caste system must be considered an 
exception to the rule; they become predominant, though, in a society that no longer 
knows the castes and, in general, in distinct social organisms in which there is no law 
to gather, preserve, and shape talents and qualifications in view of specific func¬ 
tions. Here we encounter a chaos of existential and psychic possibilities that con¬ 
demns most people to a state of disharmony and social tension; we can see plenty of 
that nowadays. Undoubtedly, there may have been a margin of indetermination even 
in tlie case of traditional man, but this margin in him only served to emphasize the 
positive aspect of these two sayings: “Know yourself” (complemented by the saying 
“nothing superfluous”), and “Be yourself,” which implied an action of inner transfor¬ 
mation and organization leading to the elimination of this margin of ^determination 
and to the integration of the self. To discover the “dominating” trait of one’s form 
and caste and to will it, by transforming it into an ethical imperative 9 and, moreover, 
to actualize it “ritually” through faithfulness in order to destroy everything that ties 
one to the earth (instincts, hedonistic motivations, material considerations, and so 
on)—such is the complement of the abovementioned view that leads to the second 
foundation of the caste system in its closeness and stability. 

On the other hand, we must keep in mind that aspect of the traditional spirit 
according to which there was no object or function that in itself could be considered 
as superior or inferior to another. The true difference was rather given by the way in 
which the object or the function was lived out. The earthly way, inspired by utilitari¬ 
anism or by greed (sakama-kamia), was contrasted with the heavenly way of the 
one who acts without concern for the consequences and for the sake of the action 
itself (ruskama-karma), and who transforms every action into a rite and into an “of¬ 
fering.” Such was the path of bhakti, a term that in this context corresponds more to 
the virile sense of medieval tides than to the pietistic sense that has prevailed in the 
theistic idea of “devotion.” An action performed according to this type of bhakti was 

9. The only modem thinker who has come close to this view, yet without being aware of it. was Nietzsche; he 
developed a view of absolute morality with a “naturalistic" basis. 


compared to a fire that generates light and in which the matter of the act itself is 
consumed and purified. The degree to which the act was freed from matter, de¬ 
tached from greed and passion, and made self-sufficient (a “pure act,” to employ 
analogically an Aristotelian expression) defined the hierarchy of activities and con¬ 
sequently the hierarchy of the castes or other bodies that corresponded to them as 
“functional classes.” 

Given these premises, which were not theoretical but experiential and thus at 
times not even openly expressed, the aspiration to go from one kind of activity to 
another (and therefore from one caste to another), which from a superficial and utili¬ 
tarian perspective may be considered by some as a worthier and more advantageous 
step, was hardly considered in the traditional world, so much so that the heredity of 
functions was spontaneously established even where there were no castes, but only 
social groups. Every type of function and activity appeared equally as a point of 
departure for an elevation in a different and vertical rather than horizontal sense; 
and not in the temporal, but in the spiritual order. In this regard, by being in their own 
caste, in faithfulness to their own caste and to their own nature, in obedience not to a 
general morality but to their morality, or to the morality of their own caste, everyone 
enjoyed the same dignity and the same purity as everybody else; this was true for a 
sudra as well as for a king. Everybody performed their function within the overall 
social order, and through their own peculiar bhakti even partook of the supernatural 
principle of this same order. Thus it was said: “A man attains perfection when his 
work is worship of God, from whom all things come and who is in all.” 10 The god 
K]*$na declared: “In any way that men love me in the same way they find my love: 
for many are the paths of men, but they all in the end come to me.” 11 And also: “In 
liberty from the bonds of attachment, do thou therefore the work to be done: for the 
man whose work is pure attains indeed the Supreme.” 12 The notion of dharma, or 
one’s peculiar nature to which one is supposed to be faithful, 13 comes from the root 
d/'(“to sustain,” “to uphold”) and it expresses the element of order, form, or cosmos 
that Tradition embodies and implements over and against chaos and becoming. 
Through dharma the traditional world, just like every living thing and every being, is 
upheld; the dams holding back the sea of pure contingency and temporality stand 
fiim; living beings partake of stability. It is therefore clear why leaving one’s caste 
and mixing castes or even the rights, the duties, the morality, and the cults of each 

10. BhagavadgTtS, 18,46. 

11. Ibid., 4.11. In 17.3 it is stated that the “devotion” of a man must be conformed to his nature. 

12. Ibid.. 3.19. See also The Laws of M.wu, 2.9: ’‘For the human being who fulfills the duty declared in the 
revealed canon and in tradition wins renown here on earth and unsurpassable happiness after death.” 

13. Bhagavndgrtfi, 18,47: “Greater is thine own work, even if this be humble, than the work of another, even 
if this be great. When a man does the work God gives him, no sin can touch this man.” 


94 


95 



The World of Truditioh 


The Doctrihe op the Chttes 


caste was considered a sacrilege that destroys the efficacy of every rite and leads 
those who are guilty of it to “hell,” 14 that is, to the realm of demonic influences that 
belong to the inferior nature. The people guilty of crossing the “caste line” were 
considered the only “impure” beings in the entire hierarchy; they were pariahs, or 
“untouchables” because they represented centers of psychic infection in the sense of 
an inner dissolution, In India only the people “without a caste” were considered 
outcasts, and they were shunned even by the lowest caste, even if they had previ¬ 
ously belonged to the highest caste; on the contrary, nobody felt humiliated by his 
own caste and even a sudra was as proud of and as committed to his own caste as a 
brahmana of the highest station was to his. Generally speaking, the idea of contami¬ 
nation did not concern only the individual of a higher caste who mixed with a mem¬ 
ber of a lower caste; even the latter felt contaminated by such mixture. 15 When gold 
and lead are mixed together, they are both altered; they both lose their own nature, 
Therefore it was necessary for everybody to be themselves, Thus, mixing subverted 
the traditional order and opened the door to infernal forces by removing what Goethe 
called the creative limitation.” The goal was the transfiguration of the “form,” which 
was obtained through bhakti and niskama-kamia, namely, through action as rite and 
as oblation; the alteration, the destruction of the “form,” no matter the way it was 
carried out, was considered as a degrading form of escapism. The outcast was just 
the vanquished—in the Aryan East he was called a fallen one, patitas. 

This was the second principle on which the caste system was founded; it was a 
thoroughly spiritual foundation, since India, which implemented this system in one 
of its strictest versions (even to the point of becoming sclerotic), never had a central¬ 
ized organization that could impose it by means of a political or economic despotism. 
Moreover, it is possible to find expressions of this second foundation even in the 
Western forms of Tradition. It was a classical idea, for instance, that perfection can¬ 
not be measured with a material criterion, but that it rather consists in realizing one’s 
nature in a thorough way. The ancients also believed that materiality only represents 

14. Ibid., 1.42-44. In relation to the duly of remaining faithful to the specific function and to lire customs of 
one’s caste, we may recall the characteristic episode in which Rama killed a serf (sOdn who practiced 
asceticism, thus usurping a privilege of the priestly caste. Also we may recall the traditional teaching 
according to which the "Iron Age" or “Dark Age" will be inaugurated when the serfs will practice asceti¬ 
cism; this seems indeed a sign of our times, as some plebeian ideologies have come to see in "labor" a 
particular kind of asceticism. 

15. Within certain limits, the idea of contamination did not apply to women; men of higher castes could marry 
women of lower castes without being contaminated. Traditionally the woman did not relate to a caste in 
a direct way but rather through her husband. The U ws ofManu (9.22): “When a woman is joined with a 
husband in accordance with the rules, she takes on the very same qualities that he has, just like a river 
flowing down into the ocean.” This is, however, no longer the case when the existential traditional struc¬ 
tures lose their vital force. 


the inability to actualize one’s form, since matter (i\Xr\) was depicted in Plato and 
Aristotle’s writings as the foundation of undifferentiation and of an evasive instabil¬ 
ity that causes a thing or being to be incomplete in itself and not to correspond to its 
norm and "idea,” (that is, to its dharma). In the Roman deification of the "limit” 
(.termen or terminus) implemented through the elevation of the god Terminus to the 
highest dignity (he was even associated with the Olympian god Jupiter) as a prin¬ 
ciple of order and also as the patron saint of the "limits”; in the tradition (susceptible 
of being interpreted in terms of higher meanings) according to which he who knocked 
down or removed a single one of the territorial boundary stones was an accursed 
being to be killed on sight by anybody; and in the Roman oracle that announced that 
the era of the destruction of the limits erected against human greed will also be the 
sa ecu him of the "end of the world” 16 —in all these elements we find the esoteric 
reverberation of the same spirit. Plotinus wrote: "Each several thing must be a sepa¬ 
rate thing; there must be acts and thoughts that are our own; the good and evil done 
by each human being must be his own.” 17 The idea that to comply perfectly with 
one’s own specific function leads to an identical participation in the spirituality of the 
whole, conceived as a living organism, can be traced back to the best Greco-Roman 
traditions; later on it eventually became part of the organic vision of the Germanic- 
Roman civilization of the Middle Ages. 

The presuppositions for the sense of joy and pride in one’s own profession (such 
that any job, no matter how humble it was, could be performed as an "art), which 
have been preserved in some European peoples until recent times as an echo of the 
traditional spirit, are not any different, after all. The ancient German peasant, for 
instance, experienced his cultivating the land as a title of nobility, even though he 
was not able to see in this work, unlike his Persian counterpart, a symbol and an 
episode of the struggle between the god of light and the god of darkness. The mem¬ 
bers of the medieval corporations and guilds were as proud of their professional 
tradition as the nobility was proud of its bloodline. And when Luther, following Saint 
Thomas, taught that to go from one profession to another in order to enhance one’s 
position in the social hierarchy ran contrary to God’s law because God assigns to 
each and every one his or her own state, and therefore people must obey Him by 
remaining where they are and that the only way to serve God consists in doing one’s 
best at one’s job, the tradition was faithfully preserved in these ideas, and the best 
spirit of the Middle Ages was reflected, although with the limitations inherent in a 
theistic and devotional schema. 

16. The meaning of this oracle converges with the Hindu leaching according to which the Dark Age (Kali 
Vuga), which is the end of a cycle (MahS Y uga), corresponds to a period of unrestrained intermingling of 
the castes and to the decline of the rites. 

17. j Enneuds, 3.1.4. 


96 


97 



The World of Trrditioii 


The Doctriiie of the Castes 


Prior to the advent of the civilization of the Third Estate (mercantilism, capital¬ 
ism), the social ethics that was religiously sanctioned in the West consisted in realiz¬ 
ing one’s being and in achieving one’s own perfection within the fixed parameters 
that one’s individual nature and the group to which one belonged clearly defined. 
Economic activity, work, and profit were justified only in the measure in which they 
were necessary for sustenance and to ensure the dignity of an existence conformed 
to one’s own estate, without the lower instinct of self-interest or profit coming first. 
Hence, we encounter a character of active impersonality in this domain as well. 

It has been noted that in the caste hierarchy, relationships like those occurring 
between potentiality and act were reenacted. In the superior caste, the same activity 
that in the inferior caste presented itself in a more conditioned form was manifested 
in a more pure, complete, and freer manner as an idea. This allows us to take issue 
with the modem demagogical ideas concerning an alleged “flocklike mindedness” 
of individuals who lived in traditional societies, and concerning the alleged lack of 
that sense of dignity and freedom of every individual that only modem, “evolved” 
mankind is supposed to have achieved. In fact, even when the hierarchical position 
of the individual did not proceed from the spontaneous acknowledgment of one’s 
own nature and one’s faithfulness to it, the subordination of the inferior to the supe¬ 
rior, far from being an indolent acquiescence, was almost the symbolical and ritual 
expression of a faithfulness and a devotion to one’s particular ideal and to a higher 
form of being that the inferior could not directly and organically live out as his own 
nature (svadhamia), but which he could still consider as the center of his own actions 
precisely through his devotion and active subordination to a higher caste. More¬ 
over, although in the East to leave one’s caste was only allowed in exceptional cases 
and a fugitive was far from being considered a free man, it was still possible to 
create certain causes through the way one conducted oneself in thought, word, and 
deed. These causes, by virtue of the analogy with the principle or with the hierarchy 
to which one was subjected, could produce a new way of being that corresponded to 
that principle or to that hierarchy. iy Besides the bhakti or tides that is aimed directly 

18. “If we say that people of this sort ought to be subject to the highest type of man, we intend that the subject 
should be governed not to his own detriment but on the same principle as his superior, who is himself 
governed by the divine element within him. It is better for everyone to be subject to a power of godlike 
wisdom residing within himself, or failing that, imposed from without.” Plato, Republic , 590d. 

19. In The Laws of'Mann, while on the one hand it is written: "Even if he is set free by his master, a servant 
is not set free from slavery; for since that is innate in him, who can take it from him?" (8.4 14); on the other 
hand we read: "The servant’s duty and supreme good is nothing but obedience to famous priestly house¬ 
holders, who know the Veda. If he is unpolluted, obedient to his superiors, gentle in his speech, without a 
sense of ‘I,’ and always dependent on the priests and the other twice-born castes, he attains a superior 
birth in the next life" (9.334—5). And also (10.42): "By the powers of their seed and their asceticism, in 
age after age these castes are pulled up or pulled down in birth among men here on earth." 


at the Supreme Principle, that is, at the Unconditioned, the bhakti that was centered 
on some other high principle was thought to have the real and objective power to 
resolve the elements of the one who had nourished it (following the fulfillment of his 
own dhanna) into this same principle, 20 and thus to make that person ascend, not 
exteriorly and artificially (as is the case in the disorder and careerism of modem 
society), but from within, in a profound and organic way, from a lower to a higher 
degree of the spiritual hierarchy as a refection of the passage of the transcendental 
principle of being from one possibility to another. 

Regarding that kind of social order that had its center in a sovereign and lasted 
up to the time of the Holy Roman Empire, there survives the principle (upheld by 
Celsus against the dualism of early Christianity) according to which the subjects may 
demonstrate their faithfulness to God through faithfulness to their ruler. The view of 
the subject as a being connected to the person of his sovereign through a sacred and 
freely chosen vow is an ancient Indo-European view. In the traditional world, this 
tides or personal devotion went beyond political and individual boundaries, and even 
acquired the value of a path leading to liberation. Cumont, in reference to Iran, 
obseived that 

The subjects dedicated to their deified kings not only their actions and 
words, but their very thoughts. Their duty was a complete abandon¬ 
ment of their personality in favor of those monarchs who were held the 
equal of gods. The sacred militia of the mysteries was nothing but this 
civic morality viewed from the religious standpoint. It confounded loy¬ 
alty with piety . 21 

This loyalty, in the brightest and most luminous forms of Tradition, was credited with 
the power of producing the same fruits faith is supposed to produce. Not too many 
years ago, the Japanese general Nogi, who had prevailed at Pott Arthur against his 
Russian foes, killed himself with his wife after the death of his emperor in order to 
follow him in the afterlife. 

All of this is self-evident since I have said that faithfulness Is the second corner¬ 
stone of every traditional organization, in addition to the rite and an elite that embod¬ 
ies transcendence. This is the force that, as a magnet, establishes contacts, creates a 

20. We may recall Plotinus’s teaching: "When we cease to live, our death hands over to another principle this 
energy of our own personal career. That principle (of the new birth) strives to gain control, and if it 
succeeds it also lives and itself, in turn, possesses a guiding spirit." Enneads, 3.1.3. In this instance, this 
"guiding spirit" corresponds to the principle that has been made the object of one’s active and loyal 
bhakti. 

21. F. Cumont, The Oriental Religions in Roman Paganism, 20. 


98 


99 



The World of tomon 


psychic atmosphere, stabilizes the social structure, and determines a system of coor¬ 
dination and gravitation between the individual elements and the center. When this 
fluid, which is rooted in freedom and in the spiritual spontaneity of the personality, 
fails, the traditional organism loses its elementary power of cohesion, paths become 
precluded, subtler senses atrophied, the parts dissociated and atomized. The conse¬ 
quence of this degeneration is the immediate withdrawal of the forces from above, 
which thus abandon men to themselves, leaving them free to go where they wish 
according to the destiny that their actions create and that no superior influence will 
ever be able to modify again. This is the mystery inherent in decadence. 


100 


15 


Professional Associations 
and the Arts; Slavery 

W hen viewed as a relationship between potentiality and act, hierarchy allowed 
the same motif established at the top to be reproduced in the activities of the 
different castes or social organisms; though on the plane of different (more or less 
spiritual) paths of fulfillment, each one retained in its own way the same upward 
orientation. This is why in the more complete traditional forms, the “sacred’ 1 was a 
light that shone not only on what today are the profane sciences, aits, ancl profes¬ 
sions, but on trades and various material activities as well. By virtue of the analogi¬ 
cal correspondences existing between the various planes, the sciences, activities, 
and skills of the lower plane could traditionally be considered as symbols of a higher 
nature and thus help to communicate the meaning hidden in the latter, since it was 
already present in the former, even though in a potential form. 1 

In the domain of knowledge, the presupposition was of a system of sciences 
fundamentally different in their premises and methodologies from modern ones. Every 
modem, profane science corresponds in the world of Tradition to a “sacred” science 
that had an organic, qualitative character and considered nature as a whole in a 
hierarchy of degrees of reality and forms of experience in which the form connected 
to the physical senses is just one among others. It is precisely in this way that the 
system of transpositions and symbolic and ritual participations was made possible. 
This was the case in cosmology and in related disciplines: for instance, ancient al¬ 
chemy was not at all a primitive chemistry and ancient astrology was not at all (as it 
is mistakenly assumed today) a superstitious deification of the heavenly bodies and 
of their movements, but a knowledge of the stars so organized as to be able to consti¬ 
tute a science of purely spiritual and metaphysical realities expressed in a symbolic 

1. R. Guenon, La Crise da monde modcmc, 108-15. 


101 



The World of Traditioh 


PROFESSION flSiOCIHTIOriS flUD THE ARTS; $LflVERy 


form. The world of Tradition knew in these same terms a physiology, parts of which 
are still preserved in the East (for example, the knowledge of anatomy and physiol¬ 
ogy presupposed by Chinese acupuncture; Japanese ju-jitsu; and some aspects of 
Hindu hatha-yoga). In this physiology, the consideration of the material aspect of the 
human organism represented only a particular chapter, becoming part of the general 
science of the correspondences between macrocosm and microcosm, human world 
and elemental world. Ancient medicine proceeded from these same premises as a 
sacred science in which “health” appeared as a symbol of “virtue”; virtue in turn 
was considered a superior form of heal th and due to the ambiguity of the term soter, 
he who “saves” was on a higher plane of the same type as he who “heals.” 

The development of the physical and practical aspect of knowledge in these 
traditional sciences must naturally appear as limited when compared and contrasted 
with modem sciences. The cause of this, however, was a correct and healthy hierar¬ 
chy in which the interests of traditional man were arranged; in other words, he did 
not give to the knowledge of external and physical reality more importance than it 
deserved or than was necessary. 2 What mattered the most in a traditional science 
was the anagogic element, namely, the power to “lead to higher planes” that was 
virtually present in the knowledge relative to a given domain of reality; this element 
is totally lacking today in modem profane sciences. The latter, in reality, may act 
and have acted exactly in the opposite direction: the worldview from which they 
originate and on which they are based is such as to affect human inferiority in a 
dissolving and negative way—in other words, they are centrifugal. 1 

Coming back to our subject matter, analogous considerations to the previous 
ones may be extended to the domain of the arts, understood both as real arts and as 
the activities of professional artisans. Concerning the former, only in periods of deca¬ 
dence did the world of Tradition come to know the emancipation of the purely “aes¬ 
thetic, subjective, and human element that characterizes modem arts. In the figura¬ 
tive arts, even prehistoric findings (such as the civilization of the Cro-Magnon and of 
the ieindeer) show the inseparability of the naturalistic element from a magical and 
symbolical intention; an analogous dimension was present also in later, more devel¬ 
oped civilizations, The “theater” corresponded to reenactements of the Mysteries, to 
the sacred dramas” and, in part, to the ludi of classical antiquity, more on which 
later. Ancient poetry had close ties with the art of telling the future and with sacred 
inspiration; poetic verse, in fact, was associated with incantation (see the ancient 


2. Very appropriately 0. Spann defines modem knowledge as “the knowledge of what is not worthy of beinu 
known." Rehgionsphilosophie (Vienna, ] 948), 44. 

3 " ^962^ mine thC illUSi0nS n0UriShed by SOme in regard 10 modem science ’ see Ca ' / ‘^oare In tigrc (Milan, 


meaning of the word carmen). As far as literature is concerned, the symbolic and 
initiatory element (which proceeded from a conscious intention and also from 
infraconscious influences grafted onto the creative spontaneity of single individuals 
and of various groups) throughout the Middle Ages often influenced not only the 
myth, saga, and traditional fairy tale, but the epic stories and chivalrous and erotic 
literature as well. The same applies to music, dance, and rhythm; Lucian reports that 
dancers, who were assimilated to priests, had a knowledge of the “sacred mysteries 
of the Egyptians,” 4 as the science of the mudras, the symbolic, magical gestures that 
play an important role in Hindu rituals and ascetical paths affected the dance, the 
mime and pantomime of that civilization. Again, these were various expressions of 
the same one intent: “one temple, sculptured in a forest of temples.” 

With specific regard to professional and artisanal activities, a typical example is 
given in the art of construction and building (their moral transpositions in the Gospels 
are well known), which occasioned even higher and initiatory interpretations. In the 
ancient Egyptian tradition, construction was regarded as a regal art, so much so that 
the king himself performed in a symbolic sense the first acts of the building of the 
temples in the spirit of an “eternal work of art.” While on the one hand people today 
are nowadays puzzled when it comes to explaining how achievements that require a 
superior knowledge of mathematics and engineering were possible in antiquity, on 
the other hand what emerges are unquestionable signs of a priestly art in the orienta¬ 
tion, placement, and other aspects of ancient buildings, especially temples and, later 
on, cathedrals. The symbolism of masonry established analogical connections be¬ 
tween the “little art” on the one hand and the “great art” and the “great work” on the 
other within secret associations that in the beginning could claim links with the cor¬ 
responding medieval professional corporations. This is also partially true in the case 
of the arts of the blacksmiths, weavers, navigators, and fanners. Concerning the 
latter, just as Egypt knew the ritual of regal constructions, likewise the Far East knew 
the ritual of regal plowing 5 and, in a symbolic transposition of the farming art, gener¬ 
ally speaking, man himself was considered as a field to be cultivated, and the initiate 
as the cultivator of the field in an eminent sense. 6 (The echo of this has been 
preserved in the very origins of the modern term “culture” in its reductive, intellectu- 
alistic, and petit bourgeois meaning.) 

The ancient arts, after all, were traditionally “sacred” to specific deities and 
heroes, always by virtue of analogical reasons, and thus they presented themselves 

4. Lucian of Samosata, On Dunce, 59, The ‘’dance of llie seven veils,” which are removed one al a time until 
the dancer is totally nude, repeats on its own plane a precise initiatory schema. 

5. Li Chi, 4.1.13; 17.3.20. 

6. J. Evola, The Hermetic Tradition, chap. 22. 


102 


103 



The UJorld of Tradition 


PROFEJSIOnBL AhOCWTIOIH ID THE Am; SLflVERy 


as potentially endowed with the possibility of “ritually” transforming physical activi¬ 
ties into symbolic actions endowed with a transcendent meaning. 

hi reality, in the caste system not only did every profession or trade correspond 
to a vocation (hence the double meaning preserved in the English term "calling”); 7 
not only was there something to be found in every product as a "crystallized tradi¬ 
tion 5 ' that could be activated by a free and personal activity and by an incomparable 
skill; not only were the dispositions developed in the exercise of a trade and ac¬ 
knowledged by the social organism transmitted through the blood as congenital and 
deep attitudes—but something else was present as well, name ly, the transmission, if 
not the real initiation, of at least an "inner tr adition 55 of the art that was preserved as 
a sacred and secret thing (arcanum magisterium), even though it was partly visible in 
the several details and rules, rich with symbolical and religious elements that were 
displayed in the traditional guilds (whether Eastern, Mexican, Roman, medieval, 
and so on). 8 Being introduced to the secrets of an art did not correspond to the mere 
empirical or rational teachings of modem man: in this domain certain cognitions 
were credited with a nonhuman origin, an idea expressed in a symbolic form by the 
traditions concerning the gods, the demons, or the heroes (Balder, Hermes, Vulcan, 
Prometheus) who originally initiated men into these aits. It is significant that Janus, 
who was also the god of initiation, was the god of the Collegia Fabrorum in Rome; in 
relation to this we find the idea that mysterious congregations of blacksmiths who 
came to Europe from the East, also brought with them a new civilization. Moreover, 
itis significant that in the locations where the oldest temples of Hera, Cupra, Aphrodite- 
Verms, Heracles-Hercules, and Aeneas were built, quite often it is possible to find 
archaeological evidence of the working of copper and bronze; and finally, it is sig¬ 
nificant that the Orphic and Dyonisiac mysteries were associated with the themes of 
the art of weaving and spinning. This order found its most complete fulfillment in 
examples found especially in the East, where the achievement of an effective mas¬ 
tery in a given art was just a symbol, a reflection, and a sign; in fact, it was the 
counterpart of a fulfillment and a parallel inner realization. 

Even in those areas in which the caste system did not have the rigor and the 
determination exemplified by Aryan India, something resembling it was developed 
in a spontaneous way in relation to inferior activities. I am referring to the ancient 
corporations or artisan guilds that were omnipresent in the traditional world, and that 


7. In the language of the campagnonagge, in which these traditions were preserved, the word was 

always synonymous with occupation: instead of asking a person what his occupation was. he u as asked 
what was his vocation.” 

8. The medieval "manuals” tha, have been preserved often mention mysterious practices that were ™k> 

a.ed w, h the process of construction itself; they also relate legends according to winch m.tstas of the nr, 

were killed because they betrayed the oath of secrecy. 


in the case ol ancient Rome date back to prehistoric times, reproducing on their own 
plane the typical makeup of the patrician gens and family. It is the art and the com¬ 
mon activity that provide a bond and an order replacing those that in higher castes 
were provided by the aristocratic tradition of blood and ritual. This does not imply 
that the collegium and the corporation lacked a religious character and a virile, 
semimilitary constitution. In Sparta the cult of a "hero” represented the ideal bond 
between the members of a given profession, even in the case of an inferior one. 9 Just 
like every city and gens, in Rome every corporation (originally consisting of free 
men) had its own demon or Jar; it had a temple consecrated to it and a correlative, 
common cull of the dead, that determined a unity in life and in death; it had its own 
sacrificial rites performed by the magisteron behalf of the community of the sodales 
or coflegae , who celebrated certain events or holy days in a solemn, mystical way 
through feasts, agapes, and games. The fact that the anniversary of the collegium or 
corporation (natalis coiiegi) coincided with the anniversary of its patron deity (natalis 
dei) and of the "inauguration" or consecration of the temple (natalis templi), indi¬ 
cates that in the eyes of the sodales the sacred element constituted the center from 
which the inner life of the corporation originated. 10 

The Roman corporation is a good example of the virile and organic aspect that 
often accompanies the sacred dimension in traditional institutions; it was hierarchi¬ 
cally constituted ad exemplum rei publicae and animated by a military spirit. The 
body of sodales was called populusov ordo, and just like the army and the people at 
solemn gatherings, it was divided into centuriae and decuriae. Every centuria had its 
leader, or centurion, and a lieutenant (optio) Just like in the legions. To differentiate 
them from the masters the other members had the name of plebs and corporate, but 
also caligati or milites caligati like simple soldiers. And the magister, besides being 
the master of the art and the priest of the corporation in charge of his "fire," was the 
aclminisirator of justice and the overseer of the behavior of the members of the group. 

Analogous characteristics were found in the medieval professional communi¬ 
ties, especially in Germanic countries: together with the community of the art, a re¬ 
ligious and ethical element bound the members of the Gilden and of the Zunften. In 
these corporate organizations, the members were bonded together "lor life" more as 
in a common rite than on the basis of the economic interests and mere productive 
goals; the effects of intimate solidarity, which affected man as a whole and not just 


9. Herodotus. The Histones , 6.60. 

10. According to a tradition, Numa, by instituting the collegia, intended for “every profession to celebrate its 
own cull" (Plutarch, Numn, 17). In India loo each profession pursued by the inferior castes often corre¬ 
sponded to a special cult of divine or legendary patrons; this practice is also found in Greece, among 
Nordic people and the Aztecs, in Islam, and so on. 


104 


105 



The World of Truiior 


Profession (Loannons fiiid tile Arts; SmvcRy 


his particular aspect as an artisan, permeated everyday life in all of its forms. As the 
Roman professional collegia had their own lar or demon, the German guilds, which 
were constituted as small-scale images of cities, also had their own “patron saint/’ 
altar, common funerary cult, symbolic insignia, ritual commemorations, ethical laws, 
and leaders (Vollenossen), who were supposed to regulate the ait and guarantee com¬ 
pliance with the general norms and duties regulating the lives of the members of the 
corporation. The requirement for being admitted to the guilds was a spotless name 
and an honorable birth; people who were not free and those belonging to foreign 
races were not admitted. Typical of these professional associations were the sense 
of honor, purity, and impersonal character of their work, almost according to the Aryan 
canons of bhakti and of niskama-kaima: everybody performed their work silently, 
setting their own person aside, while still remaining active and free human beings; 
this was an aspect of the great anonymity typical of the Middle Ages and of every 
great traditional civilization. Something else was shunned, namely, anything that could 
generate illicit competition or a monopoly, thus contaminating the punty of the art 
with mere economic concerns; the honor of one’s guild and the pride in the activity 
characterizing it constituted the firm, immaterial bases of these organizations. While 
not formally hereditary, these organizations often became so, thereby demonstrating 
the strength and the naturalness of the principle responsible for generating the castes. 11 
In this way, even in the order of inferior activities connected to matter and to mate¬ 
rial conditions of life it was possible to find the reflection of the way of being of a 
purified and free action endowed with its own tides and living soul, which freed it 
from the bonds of selfishness and ordinary interests. In the corporations there was a 
natural and organic connection between the caste of the vaisya (in modem terms, 
“management") and the caste of the sildras, namely, the working class. 

Considering the spirit of an almost military solidarity that was both felt and 
willed, and whereby the vaisya was the equivalent of a manager and the sudra an 
employee, both of whom worked in the same company, the Marxist antithesis be¬ 
tween capital and labor, between employers and employees, at that time would have 
been inconceivable. Everybody attended their own function and stayed in their own 
place. Especially in the German guilds, the faithfulness of the inferior was the coun¬ 
terpart of the pride the superior took in the subordinates’ zeal and efficiency. In this 
context too, the anarchy of “rights" and “demands” did not arise until the inner spiri¬ 
tual orientation died out and the action performed in purity was supplanted by one 

1 1. in Rome the professional guilds became hereditary during the third century a.d. From that time on, every 
member oi a corporation passed on to his heirs not only a biological legacy, but his profession and his prop¬ 
erty as well, provided that they too followed in his footsteps. This succession was enforced by the state, 
however, and thus we can no longer speak of an authentic conformity of the castes to the traditional spirit. 


motivated by materialistic and individualistic concerns, and by the multiform and 
vain fever brought about by the modem spirit and a civilization that has turned eco¬ 
nomics into a guiding principle (daemon) and a destiny. 

When the inner strength of a tides is no longer present, then every activity is 
defined according to its purely material aspect; also, equally worthy paths are re¬ 
placed with an effect-driven differentiation dictated by the type of activity being 
performed. Hence, the sense of intermediary forms of social organization, such as 
ancient slavery. As paradoxical as it may first appear in the context of those civiliza¬ 
tions that largely employed the institution of slavery, it was wont that characterized 
the condition of a slave, and not vice versa. In other words: when the activity in the 
lower strata of the social hierarchy was no longer supported by a spiritual meaning, 
and when instead of an “action" there was only “work," then the material criterion 
was destined to take over and those activities related to matter and connected to the 
material needs of life were destined to appear as degrading and as unworthy of any 
free human being. Therefore “work" (ponos) came to be seen as something that only 
a slave would engage in, and it became almost a sentence; likewise, the only dharmn 
possible for a slave was work. The ancient world did not despise labor because it 
practiced slavery and because those who worked were slaves; on the contrary, since 
it despised labor, it despised the slave; 12 since those who “worked” could not be 
anything but slaves, the traditional world willed slavery into being and it differenti¬ 
ated, instituted, and regulated into a separated social class the mass of those people 
whose way of being could only be expressed through work. 121 Labor as ponos, an 

12. |The translator of this wink has come amiss a passage that lie regards worth quoting in this context: 
"Around 1X20 an astrologer says to the young hero ot Stendhal's Cluirtcrhouse ofPnnnn: ‘In a century 
perhaps nobody will want idlers any more.' He was right. It ill becomes anyone today to admit that he 
lives without working. Si nee Marx a nil Proudhon, labor has been universally aeeepted as a positive soeial 
value and a philosophical concept. As a result, the ancients' contempt Cor labor, their undisguised scorn 
for those who work with their hands, their exaltation of leisure as the sine qua non of a ‘liberal’ life, the 
only life worthy of a man, shocks us deeply. Not only was the worker regarded as a social inferior; he was 
base, ignoble. It has often been held, therefore, that a society like the Roman, so mistaken about what we 
regard as proper values, must have been a deformed society, which inevitably paid the price of its de¬ 
formity, . , . And yet, if we are honest, we must admit that the key to this enigma lies within ourselves. 
True, we believe that work is respectable and would not dare to admit to idleness. Nevertheless, we are 
sensitive to class distinction and. admit or not, regard workers and shopkeepers as people of relatively 
little importance. We would not want ourselves or our children to sink to their station, even if we are a 
little ashamed of harboring such sentiments. Therein lies the first of six keys to ancient attitudes toward 
labor: contempt for labor equals soeial contempt for laborers.” Paul Veyne. ed., A History of Private Life , 
vol, 1, From Pngnn Rome to By/jintium, nans. Arthur Goldhummer (Cambridge, Mass., 1987), 1 18-19.] 

13. Aristotle (Politics, 1.4) based slavery on the presupposition that there are men who are only fit for physi¬ 
cal labor, who therefore must be dominated and directed by others. According to this order of ideas, a 
distinction was made between “barbarians" and “Hellenes." Likewise, the Hindu caste of the sddras 
originally corresponded to the stratum of the black aboriginal race, the ''enemy race” dominated by the 
Aryans, which had no other choice but to serve those who were '’twice-born. 1 ' 


106 


107 




Inc World of Traditioh 


Proccssiodol Ahociatioih mid THE Arts; kflVCRy 


obscure effort strictly dictated by need, was the opposite of action, the former repre¬ 
senting the material, heavy, dark pole, the latter the free pole of human possibilities 
detached from need. Free men and slaves, after all, represented the social crystalli¬ 
zation of those two ways of performing an action—either according to matter, or 
ritually—that I have already discussed; we do not need to look elsewhere to find the 
basis foi the contempt for work and of the view of hierarchy typical of the constitu¬ 
tions of an intermediate type. In such a world, speculative action, asceticism, con¬ 
templation (sometimes even play” and war) characterized the pole of action vis-a- 
vis the servile pole of work. 

Esotencally speaking, the limitations that slavery put on the possibilities of an 
individual who happened to be bom in this condition correspond to the nature of his 
given destiny,” of which slavery should be considered sometimes the natural con¬ 
sequence. On the plane of mythological transpositions, the Jewish tradition is not too 
tar from a similar view when it considers work as a consequence of Adam’s fall and, 
at the same time, as an “expiation” of this transcendental fault taking place in human 
existence. On this basis, when Catholicism.tried to turn work into an instrument of 
purification it partially echoed the general idea of the ritual offering of an action 
conformed to one’s nature (in this context: the nature of “fallen man” according to 
the Judeo-Christian view of life) as a path of liberation. 

In antiquity, the vanquished were often assigned the functions of slaves. Was 
this barbaiian-style materialism? Yes and no. Once more, we should not forget the 
t' ut'i that permeated the traditional world: nothing happens on this earth that is not 
the symbol and the parallel effect of spiritual events, since between spirit and reality 
(hence, power too) allegedly there was an intimate relationship. As a particular con¬ 
sequence of this truth, it has already been mentioned that winning or losing were 
never considered as mere coincidences. There still remains today among primitive 
populations the ancient belief that the person afflicted by misfortunes is always a 
guilty person; the outcomes of every struggle and every war are always mystical 
signs, or the results of a “divine judgment,” and therefore capable of revealing or 
unfolding a human destiny. Starting with this presupposition, it is possible to go fur¬ 
ther and establish a transcendental convergence of meanings between the tradi¬ 
tional view of the “vanquished” and the Jewish view of the “sinner,” as they both 
inherit a fate befitting the dhanna of the slave, namely, work. This convergence is 
inspired by the fact that Adam’s “fault” is associated with a defeat he suffered in a 
symbolical event (the attempt to come into possession of the fruit of the “Tree”), 
which may yet have had a victorious outcome. We know of myths in which the 
winning of the fruits of the Tree or of things symbolically equivalent (the “woman," 
the “golden fleece,” etc.) is achieved by other heroes (Heracles, Jason, Siegfried) 


and does not lead them to damnation, as in the Judeo-Christian myth, but rather to 
immortality or to a transcendent knowledge. 14 

If the modem world has disapproved of the “injustice” of the caste system, it has 
stigmatized much more vibrantly those ancient civilizations thast practiced slavery; 
recent times boast of having championed the principle of “human dignity.” This too 
is mere rhetoric. Let us set aside the fact that Europeans reintroduced and main¬ 
tained slavery up to the nineteenth century in their overseas colonies in such heinous 
forms as to be rarely found in the ancient world; what should be emphasized is that if 
there ever was a civilization of slaves on a grand scale, the one in which we are 
living is it. No traditional civilization ever saw such great masses of people con¬ 
demned to perform shallow, impersonal, automatic jobs; in the contemporary slave 
system the counterparts of figures such as lords or enlightened rulers are nowhere to 
be found. This slavery is imposed subtly through the tyranny of the economic factor 
and through the absurd structures of a more or less collectivized society. And since 
the modern view of life in its materialism has taken away from the single individual 
any possibi lity of bestowing on his destiny a transfiguring element and seeing in it a 
sign and a symbol, contemporary “slavery” should therefore be reckoned as one of 
the gloomiest and most desperate kinds of all times. It is not a surprise that in the 
masses of modem slaves the obscure forces of world subversion have found an easy, 
obtuse instrument to pursue their goals; while in the places where it has already 
triumphed, the vast Stalinist “work camps” testify to how the physical and moral 
subjection of man to the goals of collectivization and of the uprooting of every value 
of the personality is employed in a methodical and even satanic way. 

In addition to the previous considerations concerning work as art in the world of 
Tradition, I will briefly mention the organic, functional, and consistent quality of the 
objects produced, by virtue of which the Beautiful did not appear as something sepa¬ 
rated or distinct from a certain privileged category of artistic objects and the mere 
utilitarian and mercantile character of the objects was totally lacking. Eveiy object 
had its own beauty and a qualitative value, as well as its own function as a useful 
object. With regard to art in the traditional world, 

While on the one hand what occurred was (a) the prod igy of the unification 
of the opposites, (b) the utter compliance with a set of established rules in 
which eveiy personal 61an appears to be sacrificed and suffocated and (c) 
the authentic arising of spirituality within an authentic, personal creation; 15 

14. See the introduction of my Hermetic Tradition. 

15. G. Villa, La filosofia del mito secondo G. B. Vico (Milan, 1949), 98-99. 


108 


109 




The World of tanon 

on the other hand it could be rightly said that: 

Every object did not have the imprint of an individuaJ artistic personal¬ 
ity, as happens today with the so-called artistic objects; yet while re¬ 
vealing a “choral” taste, which makes of the object one of many, infi¬ 
nite expressions, it had the seal of a spiritual genuineness that prevented 
it from being called a “copy/’ 16 

Such products bore witness to one stylistic personality whose creative activity 
developed through centuries; even when a name, whether real, fictitious, or sym¬ 
bolic was known, this was considered irrelevant. Anonymity, not of a subpersonal 
but of a superpersonal character, was therefore upheld; on this soil what was bom 
and proliferated in all the domains of life were artisans’ creations that were far from 
both a shallow, plebeian sense of utility and an extrinsic, afunctional, “artificial" 
beauty; this scission reflects the overall inorganic character of modern civilization. 


6, Ibid., 102. 


110 


16 



Bipartition of the Traditional 
Spirit; Asceticism 


H aving explained the spirit that animated the caste system, it is now necessary 
to discuss the path that is above the castes and is directed at implementing the 
realization of transcendence—in analogous terms to those of high initiation, yet out¬ 
side the specific and rigorous structures characterizing it. On the one hand, the pariah 
is a person without a caste, the one who has “lapsed” or who has eluded the “form” 
by being powerless before it, thus returning to the infernal world. The ascetic, on the 
other hand, is a being above the caste, one who becomes free from the form by re¬ 
nouncing the illusory center of human individuality; he turns toward the principle from 
which every “form” proceeds, not by faithfulness to his own nature and by participa¬ 
tion in the hierarchy, but by a direct action. Therefore, as great as was the revulsion 
harbored by every caste toward the pariah in Aryan India, so, by contrast, was the 
veneration fell by everybody for a person who was above the castes. These beings, 
according to a Buddhist image, should not be expected to follow a human dharma, just 
as one who is trying to kindle a fire ultimately does not care what kind of wood is being 
employed, as long as it is capable of producing fire and light. 

Asceticism occupies an ideal intermediary state between the plane of direct, 
Olympian, and initiatory regality and the plane of rite and of dharma. Asceticism 
also presents two features or qualifications that from a broader perspective may be 
considered as qualifications of the same traditional spirit. The first aspect of the 
ascetic path is action, understood as heroic action; the second aspect is asceticism in 
the technical sense of the word, especially with reference to the path of contempla¬ 
tion. Beyond complete traditional forms and in more recent times some civilizations 
have arisen that were inspired in different degrees by either one of these two poles. 
Later on we shall see what role the two aspects have played in the dynamism of 
historical forces, even on the plane that is related to the ethnic and racial factor. In 


111 



Bipartitioh of the TRflpmonflL Spirit; Hsceticishi 


order to grasp the spirit of an ascetical tradition at a pure state it is necessary to leave 
out of consideration the meanings that have been associated with the term asceti¬ 
cism in the world of Western religiosity. Action and knowledge are two fundamental 
human faculties; in both domains it is possible to accomplish an integration capable 
of removing human limitations. The asceticism of contemplation consists of the inte¬ 
gration of the knowing faculty (achieved through detachment from sensible reality) 
with the neut]alization of individual rationalizing faculties and with the progressive 
stripping of the nucleus of consciousness, which thus becomes “free from 
conditionings” and subtracts itself from the limitation and from the necessity of any 
determination, whether real or virtual. Once all the dross and obstructions are re¬ 
moved (opus remotionis), participation in the overworld takes place in the form of a 
vision or an enlightenment. As the peak of the ascetical path, this point also repre¬ 
sents at the same time the beginning of a truly continuous, progressive ascent that 
realizes states of being truly superior to the human condition. Tire essential ideals of 
the ascetical path are the universal as knowledge and knowledge as liberation. 

The ascetical detachment typical of the contemplative path implies “renuncia¬ 
tion.” In this regard, it is necessary to prevent the misunderstanding occasioned by 
some inferior forms of asceticism. It is important to emphasize the different mean¬ 
ings that renunciation assumed in higher forms of ancient and Eastern asceticism on 
the one hand, and in most of Western and especially Christian asceticism on the 
other hand. In the latter, renunciation often assumed the character of a repression 
and of a “mortification”; the Christian ascetic becomes detached from the objects of 
desire not because he no longer has any desire, but in order to mortify himself and to 
“escape temptation,” In the former, renunciation proceeds from a natural distaste for 
objects that are usually attractive and yearned for; this distaste is motivated by the 
fact that one directly desires—or better, wills—something the world of conditioned 
experience cannot grant. In this case, what leads to renunciation is the natural nobil¬ 
ity of one’s desire rather than an external intervention aimed at slowing down, mor¬ 
tifying, and inhibiting the faculty of desire in a vulgar nature, After all, the emotional 
phase, even in its purest and noblest forms, is only found at the introductory levels in 
higher forms of asceticism; in later stages, it is consumed by the intellectual fire and 
by the arid splendor of pure contemplation. 

A typical example of contemplative asceticism is given by early Buddhism in its 
lack of religious features, its organization in a pure system of techniques, and in 
the spirit that animates it, which is so different from what anyone may think about 
asceticism. First of all, Buddhism does not know any “gods” in the religious sense of 
the word; the gods are believed to be powers who also need liberation, and thus the 
“Awakened One” is acknowledged to be superior to both men and gods. In the Bud¬ 


dhist canon it is written that an ascetic not only becomes free from human bonds, but 
from divine bonds as well. Secondly, moral norms, in the original forms of Bud¬ 
dhism, are purported to be mere instruments to be employed in the quest for the 
objective realization of superindividual states. Anything that belongs to the world of 
“believing, ’ of “faith,” or that is remotely associated with emotional experiences is 
shunned. The fundamental principle of the method is “knowledge”: to turn the knowl¬ 
edge of the ultimate nonidentity of the Self with anything “else” (whether it be the 
monistic All or the world of Brahma, theistically conceived) into a fire that progres¬ 
sively devours any irrational self-identification with anything that is conditioned. 
In conformity to the path, the final outcome, besides the negative designation 
(■nirvana = “cessation of restlessness”), is expressed in terms of “knowledge,” bodhi, 
which is knowledge in the eminent sense of superrational enlightenment or liberat¬ 
ing knowledge, as in “waking up” from sleep, slumber, or a hallucination. It goes 
without saying that this is not the equivalent of the cessation of power or of anything 
resembling a dissolution. To dissolve ties is not to become dissolved but to become 
free. The image of the one who, once freed from all yokes, whether human or divine, 
is supremely autonomous and thus may go wherever he pleases, is found very fre¬ 
quently in the Buddhist canon together with alL kinds of symbols of a virile and war¬ 
rior type, and also with constant and explicit reference not so much to nonbeing but 
rather to something superior to both being and nonbeing. Buddha, as it is well known, 
belonged to an ancient stock of Aiyan warrior nobility and his doctrine (purported to 
be the "dharmu of the pure ones, inaccessible to an uninstructed, average person”) is 
a very far ciy from any mystical escapism. Buddha’s doctrine is permeated by a 
sense of superiority, clarity, and an indomitable spirit, and Buddha himself is called 
“the fully Self-Awakened One,” "the Lord.” 1 

The Buddhist renunciation is of a virile and aristocratic type and is animated by 
an inner strength; it is not dictated by need but is consciously willed, so that the 
person practicing it may overcome need and become reintegrated into a perfect life. 
It is understandable that when our contemporaries, who only know a life that is mixed 
with nonlife that in its restlessness presents the irrational traits of a “mania,” hear 
mention of nirvana (in reference to the condition experienced by the Awakened 
One), namely, of an extinction of mania corresponding to what the Germans call 
“more than living” (mehr a/.s Leben) and to a superlife, they cannot help but equate 
nirvana with “nothingness”: for non-mania (nir-vSpa) means nonlife, or nothingness. 
After all, it is only natural that the modem spirit has relegated the values cherished 
by higher asceticism to the things of the “past.” 


112 


1. J. Evola, The Doctrine of Awakening. 



The World of Traditioii 


Bipartite of the Tradifioaai. Spirit; Oketkijhi 


A Western example of pure contemplative asceticism is given by Neoplatonism, 
With the words, “The gods ought to come to me, not I to them,'’ 2 Plotinus indicated a 
fundamental aspect of aristocratic asceticism. Also, with the sayings, “It is to the 
gods, not to good men that we are to be made like,” and, “Our concern, though, is not 
to be out of sin, but to be god,” 3 Plotinus has definitely overcome the limitations 
posed by morality, and has employed the method of inner simplification (anXcbaiq) 
as a way to become free from all conditionings in that state of metaphysical simplic¬ 
ity from which the vision 4 * will eventually arise. By means of this vision—“having 
joined as it were center to center” 3 —what occurs is the participation in that intelli¬ 
gible reality that compared to which any other reality may be characterized as more 
nonlife than life, 6 with the sensible impressions appearing as dreams 7 8 and the world 
of bodies as the place of radical powerlessness and of the inability to be. 

Another example is given by the so-called Rhineland mysticism that was ca¬ 
pable of reaching metaphysical peaks towering above and beyond Christian theism. 
Tauler’s Entwerdung corresponds to Plotinus’s anXdxnq and to the destruction of 
the element of “becoming” (or samsaric element) that Buddhism regarded as the 
condition necessary to achieve “awakening,” The aristocratic view of contemplative 
asceticism reappears in the doctrine of Meister Eckhart. Like Buddha, Eckhart ad¬ 
dressed the noble man and the “noble soul” whose metaphysical dignity is witnessed 
by the presence of a “strength,” a “light,” and a “fire” within it—in other words, of 
something before which even the deity conceived as a “person” (i.e., tbeistically) 
becomes something extenor. The method he employed consisted essentially of de¬ 
tachment from all things (Abegescheidenheit), a virtue that according to Eckhart is 
above love, humility, or mercifulness, as he explained in his sermon On Detach¬ 
ment? The principle of “spiritual centrality” was affirmed; the true Self is God, God 
is our real center and we are external only to ourselves. Fear, hope, anguish, joy, and 
pain, or anything that may bring us out of ourselves, must be allowed to seep into us. 
An action dictated by desire, even when its goal is the kingdom of heaven itself, 
eternal life, or the beatific vision, must not be undertaken. The path suggested by 
Eckhart leads from the outside to the inside, beyond everything that is mere “im¬ 

2. Porphyry, The Life of Plotinus, 10. 

3. Plotinus, Ennends, 1,2,7; 1.2.6, 

4. Ibid., i .6,9. 

3, ‘*For here too when the centers huve come together they are one, but there is duality when they are 
separate," Ibid., 6.9.10. 

6. The perfect life, the true, real life, is in that transcendent intelligible reality, and other lives are incom¬ 
plete traces of life, not perfect or pure and no more life than its opposite." Ibid., 1.4.3. 

7. Ibid., 3.6.6. 

8. Meister Eckhart: The Essential Sermons, Commentaries, Treatises and Defense, trans. E. Col ledge and B. 
McGinn. {New York, 1982), 286. 


age”; beyond things and what represents the quality of a thing (Dingheit); beyond 
forms and the quality of form (Formlichkeit); beyond essences and essentiality. From 
the gradual extinction oi all images and forms, and eventually of one’s own thoughts, 
will, and knowledge, what arises is a transformed and supernatural knowledge that 
is carried beyond all forms (ubeifonnt). Tlius one reaches a peak in respect to which 
“God” himself (always according to his theistic view) appears as something ephem¬ 
eral, that is, as a transcendent and uncreated peak of the Self without which “God” 
himself could not exist. All the typical images of the religious consciousness are 
swallowed up by a reality that is an absolute, pure possession, and that in its simplic¬ 
ity cannot help but to appear terrifying to any finite being. Once again we find a solar 
symbol: before this barren and absolute substance, “God” appears as the moon next 
to the sun. The divine light in comparison with the radiance of this substance pales, 
just as the sun’s light outshines the moon’s. 

After this brief mention of the meaning of contemplative asceticism, it is neces¬ 
sary to say something about the other path, namely, the path of action. While in 
contemplative asceticism we find a mostly inner process in which the theme of de¬ 
tachment and the direct orientation toward transcendence are predominant, in the 
second case we have an immanent process aimed at awakening the deepest forces 
of the human being and at bringing them to the limit, thus causing a superlife to 
spring from life itself in a context of absolute intensity; this is the heroic life accord¬ 
ing to the sacred meaning often displayed in the traditional Eastern and Western 
worlds. The nature of such a realization causes it to present .simultaneously an outer 
and an inner, a visible and an invisible aspect; conversely, pure contemplative as¬ 
ceticism may also lie entirely in a domain that is not connected to the external world 
by something tangible. When the two poles of the ascetical path are not separated 
and neither one becomes the “dominating” trait of a particular type of civilization, 
but on the contrary, both poles are present and joined together, then the ascetical 
element feeds in an invisible way the forces of “centrality” and “stability” of a tradi¬ 
tional organism, while the heroic element enjoys a greater relationship with the dy¬ 
namism and the force animating its structures. 

In relation to the path of action, in the next two chapters I will discuss the doc¬ 
trine of the holy war and the role played by games in antiquity. I will further develop 
the topic of heroic action given the interest it should evoke in Western man who, by 
virtue of his own nature, is more inclined to act than to contemplate. 


114 


115 



The Greater bud the Lesser iky War 


17 


The Greater and the Lesser Holy War 


onsidenng that in the traditional view of the world every reality was a symbol 
and every action a ritual, the same was true in the case of war; since war could 
take on a sacred character, “holy war” and “the path to God” became one and the 
same thing. In more or Jess explicit forms, this concept is found in many traditions: a 
religious aspect and a transcendent intent were often associated with the bloody and 
military deeds of traditional humanity. 

Livy relates that the Samnite warriors looked like initiates; 1 similarly, among 
savage populations the magical and the warrior elements are often intermingled. In 
ancient Mexico the bestowal of the title of commander (tecuhtli) was subordinated 
to the successful outcome of difficult trials of an initiatory type; also, until recent 
times the Japanese warrior nobility (the samurai) was to a large degree inspired by 
the doctrines and asceticism of Zen, an esoteric form of Buddhism. 

The ancient worldview and myths, in which the theme of antagonism repeat¬ 
edly occurred, automatically propelled the elevation of the art of war to a spiritual 
plane. This was the case of the Persian-Aryan tradition and also of the Hellenic 
world, which often saw in material warfare the reflection of a perennial cosmic struggle 
between the spiritual Olympian-Uranian element of the cosmos on the one hand, 
and the Titanic, demonic-feminine unrestrained elements of chaos on the other hand.’ 
This interpretation is possible especially in those instances where war was associ¬ 
ated with the idea of the empire, and also because of the transcendent meaning this 
concept evoked; it was then translated into a very powerful idea. The symbolism of 
Heracles’ labors, he being the hero fighting on the side of the Olympian forces, was 
applied to as late a figure as Frederick I of Hohenstaufen. 


" Saera, 0 °LT'T S r ni ' iUm militeS e0que Candida vesle et poribus candore armis msignes." His,cry o, 
Rome 9.44 J, And also: -‘They had also called in the aid of the gods by submitting the soldiers to a kind ol 

~ n mt0 an andcnl “ f oa ‘ h ' vttusta vejut Mliatis 


Special views concerning one’s fate in the afterlife introduce us to the inner 
meanings of warrior asceticism. According to the Aztec and Nahua races, the high¬ 
est seat of immortality—the “House of the Sun” or the “House of Huitzilopochtli”— 
was reserved not only for sovereigns but for heroes as well; as far as ordinary people 
were concerned, they were believed to slowly fade away in a place analogous to the 
Hellenic Hades. The Nordic-Aryan mythology conceived Valhalla as the seat of 
heavenly immortality reserved for the heroes fallen on the battlefield, in addition to 
nobles and free men of divine origin. This seat was related to the symbolism of 
“heights” (as Glitnirbjorg, the “resplendent mountain,” or Hmninbjorg, the “heav¬ 
enly mountain,” the highest divine mountain on whose peaks an eternal brightness 
shines beyond the clouds), and was often identified with Asgard, namely, with the 
Aesir’s seat located in the Middle Land (Mitgard); the Lord of this seat was Odin- 
Wotan, the Nordic god of war and victory. According to a particular myth, Odin was 
the king who with his sacrifice showed to the heroes the path that leads to the divine 
dwellings where they will live forever and be transformed into his “sons.” 2 Thus, 
according to the Nordic races, no sacrifice or cult was more cherished by the su¬ 
preme god and thought to bear more supernatural fruits than the one celebrated by 
the hero who falls on the battlefield; from a declaration of war to its bloody conclu¬ 
sion, the religious element permeated the Germanic hosts and inspired the individual 
warrior as well. Moreover, in these traditions we find the idea that by means of a 
heroic death the warrior shifted from the plane of the material, earthly war to the 
plane of struggle of a transcendent and universal character. The hosts of heroes were 
believed to constitute the so-called Wildes Heer, the mounted stormtroopers led by 
Odin who take off from the peak of Mount Valhalla and then return to rest on it. In 
the higher forms of this tradition, the host of the dead heroes selected by the Valkyrie 
for Odin, with whom the Wildes Heer eventually became identified, was the army 
the god needed in order to fight against the ragna-rokkr, the “twilight of the gods” 
that has been approaching for a very long time.- 1 It is written: “There is a very large 
number of dead heroes in Valhalla, and many more have yet to come, and yet they 
will seem too few when the wolf comes.” 4 

What has been said so far concerns the transformation of the war into a “holy 
war.” Now 1 wish to add some specific references found in other traditions. 

2. Ynglingasaga, 10. 

3. The term ragna-rokkr is found in ihe Loknsenna (39). and it literally means "twilight of the gods.” More 
often we encounter the term ragna-rok (Voluspa, 44), which signifies the "doom” or the "end of the gods.” 
The term ragna-rokkr became prevalent because from the twelfth or thirteenth century on, Norse writers 
adapted it instead of ntgna-rok. The Nordic view of the Wildes Heer corresponds to the Iranian view of 
Mithras, the "sleepless warrior,” who at the head of the fravashi leads the fight against the enemies of the 
Aryan religion {Yushnu, 10.10). 

4. Gylfnginning, 38. 


116 


117 



The World of Trdditiod 


The Greater add the Lesser TIolh UJhr 


In the Islamic tradition a distinction is made between two holy wars, the “greater 
holy war” (el-jihadul-akbar) and the “lesser holy war” (el-jihadul-ashgar). This dis¬ 
tinction originated from a saying (hadith) of the Prophet, who on the way back from 
a military expedition said: “You have returned from a lesser holy war to the greater 
holy war.” Hie greater holy war is of an inner and spiritual nature; the other is the 
material war waged externally against an enemy population with the particular in¬ 
tent of bringing “infidel” populations under the rule of “God’s Law” (al-Islam). The 
relationship between the “greater” and the “lesser holy war,” however, mirrors the 
telationship between the soul and the body; in order to understand the heroic asceti¬ 
cism or “path of action,” it is necessary to recognize the situation in which the two 
paths merge, “the lesser holy war” becoming the means through which “a greater 
holy war” is carried out, and vice versa: the “little holy war,” or the external one, 
becomes almost a ritual action that expresses and gives witness to the reality of the 
first. Originally, orthodox Islam conceived a unitary form of asceticism: that which is 
connected to the jihad or “holy war.” 

The “greater holy war” is man’s struggle against the enemies he carries within. 
More exactly, it is the struggle of man’s higher principle against everything that is 
merely human in him, against his inferior nature and against chaotic impulses and all 
sorts of materia] attachments. 5 6 This is expressly outlined in a text of Aryan warrior 
wisdom: “Know Him therefore who is above reason; and let his peace give thee 
peace. Be a warrior and kill desire, the powerful enemy of the soul.”'' 

The enemy who resists us and the “infidel” within ourselves must be subdued 
and put in chains. This enemy is the animalistic yearning and instinct, the disorga¬ 
nized multiplicity of impulses, the limitations imposed on us by a fictitious self, and 
thus also fear, weakness, and uncertainty; this subduing of the enemy is the only way 
to achieve inner liberation or the rebirth in a state of a deeper inner unity and “peace” 
in the esoteric and triumphal sense of the word. 

In the world of traditional warrior asceticism the “lesser holy war,” namely, the 
external war, is indicated and even prescribed as the means to wage this “greater 

5. R. Guenon, Le Symbolisms dc la croix. 77. In reference lo ihe BluguvadgMi, u lexi written in the Ibmi of 
u dialogue between the warrior Arjuna and the Lord Krsna, Guenon wrote: "Krsna and Arjuna, who 
represent respectively the Self and the empirical ego, or personality and individuality, or the uncondi¬ 
tioned nttnnn and the living soul (jivSln 1,1), climbed into the same chariot, which is the vehicle of Being 
considered in its manifested state. As Arjuna fights on, Krsna drives the chariot without becoming in¬ 
volved in the action. The same meaning is also found in various Upanisads; 'the two birds sitting in the 
same tree,' and 'the two birds who entered into a cave.' Al Hallaj said: 'We are two souls joined together 
within the same body.’” 

The famous seal found in the Knights Templar tradition (a horse mounted by two knights wearing a 
helmet and a spike, and underneath the inscription sigillum mililum Chrisii) may be interpreted along the 
same lines. 

6 . BhngdvndgTtfi 3 , 43 . 


holy war”; thus in Islam the expressions “holy war” (jihad) and “Allah’s way” are 
often used interchangeably. In this order of ideas action exercises the rigorous func¬ 
tion and task of a sacrificial and purifying ritual. The external vicissitudes experi¬ 
enced during a military campaign cause the inner “enemy” to emerge and to put up 
a fierce resistance and a good fight in the fonn of the animalistic instincts of self- 
preservation, fear, inertia, compassion, or other passions; those who engage in battles 
must overcome these feelings by the time they enter the battlefield if they wish to 
win and to defeat the outer enemy or the “infidel.” 

Obviously the spiritual orientation and the “right intention” (niya), that is, the 
one toward transcendence (the symbols employed to refer to transcendence are 
“heaven,” “paradise,” “Allah’s gardens” and so on), are presupposed as the founda¬ 
tions of jihad, lest war lose its sacred character and degenerate into a wild affair in 
which true heroism is replaced with reckless abandonment and what counts are the 
unleashed impulses of the animalistic nature. 

It is written in the Koran: “Let those who would exchange the life of this world 
for the hereafter fight for the cause of Allah; whether they die or conquer, We shad 
richly reward them.” 7 The presupposition according to which it is prescribed, “When 
you meet the unbelievers in the battlefield strike off their heads, and when you have 
laid them low, bind your captives firmly”; 1 * or, “Do not falter or sue for peace when 
you have gained the upper hand,” 9 is that “the life of this world is but a sport and a 
pastime” 10 and that “whoever is ungenerous to this cause is ungenerous to himself.” 11 
These statements should be interpreted along the lines of the evangelical saying: 
“Whoever wishes to save his life shall lose it; but whoever loses his life for my sake 
shall find it” (Matt. 16:25). This is confirmed by yet another Koranic passage: “Why 
is it that when it is said to you: ‘March in the cause of Allah/ you linger slothfully in 
the land? Are you content with this life in preference to the life to come?” 12 “Say: 
‘Are you waiting for anything to befall us except victory or martyrdom?”’ n 

Another passage is relevant as well: “Fighting is obligatory for you, as much as 
you dislike it. But you may hate a thing although it is good for you, and love a thing 
although it is bad for you. Allah knows but you do not.” 14 This passage should also be 
connected with the following one: 

7. /Coni/i 4:76. 

8. Ibid., 47:4. 

9. Ibid., 47:37. 

10. Ibid. 

11. Ibid., 47:38. 

12. Ibid., 9:38. 

13. Ibid., 9:52. 

14. Ibid., 2:216. 


138 


119 



The World of Trad™ 


The Greater add the Lesser WoLy War 


They were content to be with those who stayed behind: a seaJ was set 
upon their hearts, leaving them bereft of understanding. But the Apostle 
and the men who shared his faith fought with their goods and their per¬ 
sons. These shall be rewarded with good things. They shall surely pros¬ 
per. Allah has prepared for them gardens watered by running streams, 
in which they shall abide forever. That is the supreme triumph. ^ 

This place of “rest” (paradise) symbolizes the superindividual states of being, the 
realization of which is not confined to the postmortem alone, as the following pas¬ 
sage indicates: “As for those who are slain in the cause of Allah, He will not allow 
their works to perish. He will vouchsafe them guidance and ennoble their state; He 
will admit them to the Paradise He has made known to them.” 16 In the instance of 
teal death in battle, we tind the equivalent of the mors triumph a I is found in classical 
traditions. Those who have experienced the “greater holy war” during the “lesser 
holy war,” have awakened a power that most likely will help them overcome the 
crisis of death; this power, having already liberated them from the “enemy” and 
from the “infidel,” will help them avoid the fate of Hades. This is why in classical 
antiquity the hope of the deceased and the piety of his relatives often caused figures 
of heroes and of victors to be inscribed on the tombstones. It is possible, however, to 
go through death and conquer, as well as achieve, the superlife and to ascend to the 
“heavenly realm” while being alive. 

The Islamic formulation of the heroic doctrine corresponds to that formulated in 
the BhagavadgTta, in which the same meanings are expressed in a purer way. The 
doctrine of liberation Through pure action, which is expounded in this text, is de- 
claied to be solar in origin and is believed to have been communicated by the 
founder of the present cycle to dynasties of sacred kings rather than to priests 
(brahmana).' 1 

The piety that keeps the wairior Arjuna ^ from going to battle against his en¬ 
emies, since he recognizes among them his own relatives and teachers, is character¬ 
ized by the Bhagavadgita as “lifeless dejection.” The text adds: “Strong men do not 
know despair, for that wins neither heaven nor earth.” 19 The promise is the same: “In 
death thy glory in heaven, in victory thy glory on earth. Arise therefore, with thy soul 


15. Ibid., 9:88-89. 

16. Ibid., 47: 5-7. 

17. Bluign Vcidgrtfi, 4.1-2, 

18. Arjuna has Hie tide ofGudakesha, which means "Lord of sleep.” Thus, he represents a warrior version c 
Lhe Awakened One"; Arjuna also ascended a “mountain” (in the Himalayas) to practice asceticism an 
to achieve superior warrior skills. In the Iranian tradition the attribute of “sleepless" was referred in a 
eminent sense lo the god of light, Ahura-Mazda { Vendidad, 19.20) and to Mithras ( Ynshn a. 10.10) 

19. Bhngn vndgHfi, 2.2. 


ready to fight.” 20 The inner attitude—the equivalent of the Islamic niya —that is 
capable of transforming the “lesser war” into a “greater holy war” is described in 
dear terms: “Offer to me all thy works and rest thy mind on the Supreme. Be free 
from vain hopes and selfish thoughts, and with inner peace fight thou thy fight.” 21 
The purity of this type of action, which must be willed for its own sake, is also cel¬ 
ebrated in clear terms: “Prepare for war with peace in thy soul. Be in peace in plea¬ 
sure and pain, in gain and in loss, in victory or in the loss of a battle. In this peace 
there is no sin.” 22 In other words: you will not stray from the supernatural direction by 
fulfilling your dharma as a warrior. 23 

The relationship between war and “the path to God” is present in the Gita too, 
though the metaphysical rather than the ethical aspect is more heavily stressed: the 
warrior reproduces somewhat the deity’s transcendence. The teaching Krsna im¬ 
parts to Arjuna concerns first of all the distinction between what is pure and undying 
and that which, as a human and naturalistic element, only appears to exist: 

The unreal never is: the Real never is not. This truth indeed has been 
seen by those who can see the true. Interwoven in his creation, the 
Spirit is beyond destruction. No one can bring to an end the Spirit which 
is everlasting. . .. If any man thinks he slays, and if another thinks he is 
slain, neither knows the ways of truth. The Eternal in man cannot kill: 
the Eternal in man cannot die.. .. He does not die when the body dies. 

. . these bodies have an end in their time; but he remains immeasur¬ 
able, immortal. Therefore, great warrior, carry on thy fight . 24 

The consciousness of the irreality of what can be lost or caused to be lost as ephem¬ 
eral life and as mortal body (the equivalent of the Islamic view that this life is just a 
sport and a pastime) is associated with the knowledge of that aspect of the divine 
according to which this aspect is an absolute power before which every conditioned 
existence appears as a negation; this power becomes naked and dazzles in a terrible 
theophany precisely in the act of destruction, in the act that “negates the negation,” 


20. Ibid., 2.37. 

21. Ibid., 3.30. 

22. Ibid. 2.38. In the Chinese tradition mention is made of the brave and virile warrior who "regards equally 
defeat and victory" and of his noble countenance, which is unaffected by “tumultuous passions”: "When 
1 journey inward 1 find a pure heart; even if 1 had to face a thousand or ten thousand enemies, I march 
against them without any fear." Mencius, 3.2, 

23. The Laws of Monu (5.98): "When a man is killed by upraised weapons in battle, in fulfillment of the duty 
of a ruler, instantly he completes both a sacrifice and the period of pollution caused by his death." Also 
(7.89): "Kings who try' lo kill one another in battle and fight to their utmost ability, never averting their 
faces, go to heaven,” 

24. BhagnvndgTta, 2.16-20. 


120 


121 



The Would of Traditioii 


ill the whirlwind that sweeps away every finite life, either destroying it or making it 
arise again in a transhuman state. 

In order to free Arjuna from doubt and from the “soft bond of the soul,” Krsna 
says: 

I am the life of all living beings, and the austere life of those who train 
their souls. And lam from everlasting the seed of eternal life. I am the 
intelligence of the intelligent. I am the beauty of the beautiful. I am the 
power ot those who are strong, when this power is free from passions 
and selfish desires. I am desire when this is pure, when this desire is not 
against righteousness. 2 * 

In the end, having abandoned all personifications, Kr*na manifests himself in the 
“wonderful and fearful form before which the three worlds tremble," “vast, reaching 
ihe sky, burning with many colors, with wide open mouths, with vast flaming eyes.” 26 
Finite beings—as lamps outshone by a much greater source of light, or as circuits 
pervaded by a much greater current—give way, disintegrate, melt, because in their 
midst there is now a power transcending their form, that wills something infinitely 
greater than anything that as individual agents they may will by themselves. This is 
why finite beings “become,” being transformed and going from the manifested into 
the unmanifested, from the material to the immaterial. On this basis the power ca¬ 
pable of producing the heroic realization is clearly defined. The values are over¬ 
turned: death becomes a witness to life, and the destructive power of time displays 
the indomitable nature hidden inside what is subject to time and death. Hence the 
meaning of these words uttered by Arjuna at the moment in which he experiences 
the deity as pure transcendence: 

As roaring torrents of waters rush forward into the ocean, so do these 
heroes of our mortal world rush into thy flaming mouths. And as moths 
swiftly rushing enter a burning flame and die, so all these men rush to 
thy fire, rush fast to their own destruction , 27 

Krsna also added: 

I am all-powerful Time which destroys all things, and I have come here 
to slay these men. Even if thou dost not fight, all the warriors facing 
thee shall die. Arise therefore! Win thy glory, conquer thy enemies, 

25. Ibid., 7.9-! 1. 

26. Ibid., 11.20, 24. 

27. [bid,, 11.28-29. 

122 


The Greater hud the Lesser How War 

and enjoy thy kingdom. Through fate of their own karma I have doomed 
them to die: be thou merely the means of my work ... tremble not, fight 
and slay them. Thou shalt conquer thy enemies in battle. 2K 

In this way we find again the identification of war with “the path to God.” The war¬ 
rior evokes in himself the transcendent power of destruction; he takes it on, becomes 
transfigured in it and free, thus breaking loose from all human bonds. Life is like a 
bow and the soul like an arrow, the target being aimed at is the Supreme Spirit; 
another text of the same Hindu tradition says that what matters is to become united 
with the Supreme, as an arrow is united with its target. 2 '* This is the metaphysical 
justification of war and the transformation of the lesser into the greater holy war. It 
also sheds further light on the meaning of the traditions concerning the transforma¬ 
tion, in the course of the battle, of a warrior or a king into a god. According to an 
Egyptian tradition, Ramses Me ri a nun was transformed in the battlefield into the god 
Amon, and said: “I am like Baal in his own time”; when his enemies recognized him 
in the melee, they cried out: “This is not a man; he is Satkhu, the Great Warrior; he is 
Baal in the flesh.” In this context Baal is the equivalent of the Vedic Siva andlndra; 
of the solar god Tiuz-Tyr, who is represented by a sword and by the rune Y, which is 
the ideogram of resurrection (“a man with raised arms”); and of Odin-Wotan, the 
gocl of battles and of victories. It should not be forgotten that both Indra and Wotan 
are conceived of as gods of order and as the overseers of the world’s course (Indra is 
called “the one who stems the tides”; as the god of the day and of clear skies he also 
exhibits Olympian traits). What we find in these examples is the general theme of 
war being justified as a reflection of the transcendent war waged by “form” against 
chaos and the forces of the inferior nature that accompany it. 

Further on, I will discuss the classical Western forms of the “path of action.” As 
far as the Western doctrine of the “holy war” is concerned, I will refer here only to 
the Crusades. The fact that during the Crusades men who fought the war intensely 
and experienced it according to the same spiritual meaning were found on both sides 
demonstrates the true unity between people who shared the same traditional spirit; a 
unity that can be preserved not only through differences of opinion but also through 
the most dramatic contrasts. In their rising up in arms against each other, Islam and 
Christianity gave witness to the unity of the traditional spirit. 

The historical context in which the Crusades took place abounds with elements 
capable of conferring upon them a potential symbolical and spiritual meaning. The 

28. [bid., 11.32-34, 

29. MSrkantfeyn PtirSnu, 42.7.8. Along these lines we may understand the “solar” transfiguration of the 
divine hero Kama described in the MahnbhSrata: from his body, fallen on the battlefield, a thunderbolt ot 
light tears the heavenly vault and pierces the “sun.” 


123 



The World of Tradi'iioo 


Tile Greater mid the Lesser Hold UJhr 


conquest of the “Holy Land” located “beyond the sea” in reality had many more 
connections with ancient traditions than it was first thought; according to these tradi¬ 
tions, “in the ancient East, where the sun rises, there lies the happy region of the 
Aesir and in it, the city of Ayard, where there is no death and where journeyers enjoy 
a heavenly peace and eternal life.” 30 Moreover, the struggle against Islam, by virtue 
of its nature, shared from the beginning several common traits with asceticism: “It 
was not a matter of fighting for earthly kingdoms, but for the kingdom of God: the 
Crusades were not a human, but a divine affair; consequently they should not be 
considered like all other human events.” 31 The holy war was at that lime the equiva¬ 
lent of a spiritual war and of “a cleansing that is almost a purgatorial fire that one 
experiences before death,” to use an expression found in a chronicle of those times. 
Popes and preachers compared those who died in the Crusades to “gold tested three 
times and purified seven times in the furnace”; the fallen warriors were believed to 
find grace with the supreme Lord. In his De jaude novae militiae, Saint Bernard 
wrote: 

Whether we live or die, we belong to the Lord. What u glory it is for you 
to emerge from the battle crowned with victory! But what a greater 
glory it is to win on the battlefield an immortal crown. . . . What a truly 
blessed condition, when one can wait for death without any fear, yearn¬ 
ing for it and welcoming it with a strong spirit ! 32 

The crusader was promised a share in the “absolute glory” and “rest" in paradise (in 
the coarse language of the time: conquerre lit en paradis), which is the same kind of 
supernatural rest mentioned in the Koran. 

Likewise, Jerusalem, the military objective of the Crusades, appeared in the 
double aspect of an earthly and of a heavenly city, 33 and thus the Crusade became 
the equivalent in terms of heroic tradition of a “ritual/’ a pilgrimage, and the “pas¬ 
sion” of the via crucis. Moreover, those who belonged to the orders that contributed 
the most to the Crusades—such as the Knights Templar and the Knights of Saint 
John—were men who, like the Christian monks or ascetics, learned to despise the 
vanity of this life; these orders were the natural retirement place for those warriors 

30. B.Kugler, History of the Crusades (Milan, 1887). This region appears as one of the represent alums of the 
symbolic “center of the world”; in this context, though, it is mingled with motifs proper to the Noidu 
tradition, considering that Ayard is Asgard, the Ae.sir’s seal described in the Eddie saga, which is often 
confused with Valhalla, 

31. J. Michaud, The History of (he Crusades (Milan, 1909). 

32. Saint Bernard, De Jmide novae miiitiae. 

33. tn the Judeo-Christian belief system, Jerusalem was often considered as an image of ihe mysterious 
SaJem ruled by Melchizedek. 


who were weary ot the world, who had seen and experienced just about everything, 
and who had directed their spiritual quest toward something higher. The teaching 
that vita est militia super tenam was instilled in these blights in an integral, inner, 
and outer fashion. Through prayers they readied themselves to fight and to move 
against the enemy. Their matins was the trumpet; their hair shirts, the armor they 
rarely took off; their fortresses, the monasteries; the trophies taken from the infidels, 
the relics and the images of saints. A similar kind of asceticism paved the way for 
that spiritual realization that was also related to the secret dimension of chivalry. 

The military defeats the crusaders suffered, after an initial surprise and perplex¬ 
ity, helped to purify the Crusades from any residue of materialism and to focus on the 
inner rather than on the outer dimension, on the spiritual rather than on the temporal 
element. By comparing the unfortunate outcome of a Crusade with that of an unno¬ 
ticed virtue, which is appreciated and rewarded only in the next life, people learned 
to see something superior to both winning and losing and to put all their values in the 
ritual and “sacrificial” aspect of an action as an end in itself, which is performed 
independently from the visible earthly results as an oblation aimed at deriving the 
life-giving “absolute glory” from the sacrifice of the human element. 

Therefore, in the Crusades we find the recurrence of the main meanings of 
expressions such as: “Paradise lies under the shade of the swords,” and “The blood 
of the heroes is closer to God than the ink of the philosophers and the prayers of the 
faithful/’ as well as the view of the seat of immortality as the “island of heroes,” (or 
Valhalla) and as the “court of heroes.” What occurs again is the same spirit that 
animated the warrior in Zoroastrian dualism. By virtue of this spirit, the followers of 
Mithras assimilated the exercise of their cult to the military profession; the neo¬ 
phytes swore by an oath (sacramentum) similar to that required of the recruits in the 
army; and once a man joined the ranks of the initiates, he became part of the “sacred 
militia of the invincible god of light.” 34 

Moreover, it must be emphasized that during the Crusades the realization of 
universality and of supemationalism through asceticism was eventually achieved. 
Leaders and nobles from all lands converged into the same sacred enterprise, above 
and beyond their particular interests and political divisions, to forge a European soli¬ 
darity informed by the same ecumenical ideal of the Holy Roman Empire. The main 
strength of the Crusades, was supplied by chivalry, which as I have already remarked, 
was a supernational institution whose members had no homeland because they would 
go anywhere they could to fight for those principles to which they swore uncondi¬ 
tional faithfulness. Since Pope Urban II referred to chivalry as the community of 

34. F. Cumom. The Oriental Religions in Roman Paganism, xv-xvi. 


124 


125 



The World oe Tradition 


The Greater aad the Lesser Hold War 


those who u show up everywhere a conflict erupts, in order to spread the terror that 
their weapons evoke in defense of honor and justice,” he expected chivalry to an¬ 
swer the call to a holy war. Thus, here too we find a convergence of the inner and 
outer dimensions; in the holy war the individual was afforded the experience of a 
meta-individual action. Likewise, the teaming up of warriors for a purpose higher 
than their own race, national interests, or territorial and political concerns was an 
external expression of the overcoming of all particularities, already an ideal of the 
Holy Roman Empire. 35 In reality, if the universality connected with the asceticism of 
the pure spiritual authority is the condition for an invisible traditional unity that exists 
over and above any political division within the body of a unitary civilization in¬ 
formed by the cosmic and by the eternal (in respect of which everything that is pa¬ 
thos and human inclination disappears and the dimension of the spirit presents the 
same characteristic of purity and power as the great forces of nature); and when this 
universality is added to “universality as action”—then we arrive at the supreme 
ideal of the empire, an ideal whose unity is both visible and invisible, material and 
political, as well as spiritual. Heroic asceticism and the untameability of the warrior 
vocation strengthened by a supernatural direction are the necessary instruments that 
allow the inner unity to be analogically reflected in the outer unity, namely, in the 
social body represented by many peoples that are organized and unified by the same 
one great conquering stock. 

Moreover, those who love to contrast the past with our recent times should con¬ 
sider what modem civilization has brought us to in terms of war. A change of level 
has occurred; from the warrior who fights for the honor and for the right of his lord, 
society has shifted to the type of the mere “soldier” that is found in association with 
the removal of all transcendent or even religious elements in the idea of fighting. 

To fight on “the path to God” has been characterized as “medieval” fanaticism; 
conversely, it has been characterized as a most sacred cause to fight for “patriotic” 
and “nationalistic” ideals and for other myths that in our contemporary era have 
eventually been unmasked and shown to be the instruments of irrational, materialis¬ 
tic, and destructive forces. It has gradually become possible to see that when “coun¬ 
try” was mentioned, this rallying cry often concealed the plans of annexation and 
oppression and the interests of monopolistic industries; all talk of “heroism” was 
done by those who accompanied soldiers to the train stations. Soldiers went to the 
front to experience war as something else, namely, as a crisis that all too often did 

35. An analogous form of universality “through action’’ was achieved to a large degree by the ancient Roman 
civilization. Even the Greek city-states experienced something higher than their political particularisms 
“through action,” that is, through the Olympic games and through the league of the Hellenic cities against 
the “barbarians.” 


not turn out to be an authentic and heroic transfiguration of the personality, but rather 
the regression of the individual to a plane of savage instincts, “reflexes,” and reac¬ 
tions that retain very little of the human by virtue of being below and not above 
humanity. 36 

The era of nationalism has known a worthy surrogate for the two great tradi¬ 
tional culminations that are the universality of spiritual authority and heroic univer¬ 
sality: I am referring to imperialism. Although in society the act of one who takes 
over somebody else’s goods by force, whether out of envy or out of need, is consid¬ 
ered to be reprehensible, a similar behavior in the relationships between nations has 
been considered as a natural and legitimate thing; it has consecrated the notion of 
fighting; and it has constituted the foundation of the “imperialistic” ideal. It was 
thought that a poor nation “lacking living space” has every right, if not the duty, to 
take over the goods and the lands of other people. In some instances the conditions 
leading to expansion and to “imperialist conquest” have been fabricated ad hoc. A 
typical example has been the pursuit of demographical growth, inspired by the pass¬ 
word “There is power in numbers.” Another example, more widespread and denot¬ 
ing a lower mentality since it is exclusively controlled by economic and financial 
factors, is that of overproduction. Once a nation experiences an excess of production 
and the demographical or commercial “need for space,” it desperately requires an 
outlet. When the outlet of a “cold war” or diplomatic intrigues are no longer suffi¬ 
cient, what ensues are military expeditions that in my view rank much lower than 
what the barbaric invasions of the past may have represented. Such an upheaval, 
which has recently assumed global proportions, is accompanied by hypocritical rheto¬ 
ric. The great ideas of “humanity,” “democracy,” and “the right of a people to self- 
determination,” have been mobilized. From an external point of view, not only is the 
idea of “holy war” considered “outdated,” but also the understanding of it thatpeople 
of honor had developed; the heroic ideal has now been lowered to the figure of the 

36. The reading of the so-called war novels written by E. M, Remarque (especially All Quiet On the Western 
Front) reveals the contrast between the patriotic idealism and rhetoric on the one hand and the realistic 
results of the experience of the war among European youth. An Italian officer, in the aftermath of World 
War I wrote: “When war is seen at a distance it may have idealistic and knightly overtones for the 
enthusiastic souls and some sort of choreographic beauty for aesthetes. It is necessary that future genera¬ 
tions learn from our generation that there is no fascination more false and no legend more grotesque than 
that which attributes to war any virtue or influence on progress, and an education that is not based on 
cruelty, revolution and brutishness. Once stripped of her magical attractive features, Bellona is more 
disgusting than Alcina, and the youth who died in her arms have shivered in horror at her touch. But we 
had to go to war.” V. Coda, DuJIu Bainsizzn af Pinve. It was only in the earlier works of Ernst Jlinger, 
inspired by his personal experiences as a soldier in the German army, that we find again the idea that 
these processes may change polarity and that the most destructive aspects of modern technological war 
may condition a superior type of man, beyond the patriotic and “idealist” rhetoric as well as beyond 
humanitarianism and antimilitarism. 


126 


127 



The World of taion 


policeman because the new “crusades” have not been able to find a better flag to 
rally around than that of the “struggle against the aggressor.” From an inner point of 
view, beyond all this rhetoric, what proved to be decisive was the brute, cynical will 
to power of obscure, international, capitalist, and collectivist powers. At the same 
time “science” has promoted an extreme mechanization and technologization of war, 
so much so that today war is not a matter of man against man but of machines against 
man. Rational systems of mass extermination are being employed (through indis¬ 
criminate air raids, atomic weapons, and chemical warfare) that leave no hope and 
no way out; such systems could once have been devised only to exterminate germs 
and insects. In contrast to “medieval superstitions” that refer to a “holy war,” what 
our contemporaries consider sacred and worthy of the actual “progress of civiliza¬ 
tion” is the fact that millions of human beings, taken away en masse from their 
occupations and vocations (which are totally alien to the military vocation), and lit¬ 
erally turned into what military jargon refers to as “cannon fodder,” will die in such 
events. 


128 


18 



Games and Victory 


I n classical antiquity games (ludi) had a sacred character and they therefore be¬ 
came typical expressions of the traditional path of action. “ Ludorum prim am 
initium procurandis religionibus datum, ” wrote Livy. It was considered dangerous to 
neglect the sacred games (negligere sacra certamma); thus, it the state’s funds were 
depleted, the games were simplified but never suppressed. An ancient Roman law 
required the duoviri and the aediles to have the games celebrated in honor of the 
gods. Vitruvius wanted every city to be endowed with its own theater, deorum 
inmiortalium diebus festis ludorum spectationibus, and originally the person presid¬ 
ing over the games in the Circus Maximus was also the priest of Ceres, Liber, and 
Libera, In any event, the person in charge of the games in Rome was always a 
representative of the official patrician religion; in the case of some games (such as 
the Salihs), special priestly colleges were formed for the occasion. The games were 
so closely related to pagan temples that Christian emperors had no choice but to 
keep them open, since shutting them down would have caused those games to be 
canceled; these games even outlasted most ancient Roman institutions, and eventu¬ 
ally ended with the Roman Empire itself. An agape to which demons were invited 
(invitatione daemonum) usually closed the games, signifying a ritual participation of 
the people in the mystical force associated with them. 1 Augustine reported that “ ludi 
scenici .. . inter res divinas a doctissimis conscribuntur. ” 2 

The games assumed the character of res divinae , and they have been replaced 
today by contemporary sports and by the plebeian infatuation with them. In the Hel¬ 
lenic tradition the institution of the most important games bore a close relationship 
with the idea of the struggle of Olympian, heroic, and solar forces against natural 
and elemental forces. The Pythian games in Delphi celebrated Apollo’s triumph 
over Python and the victoiy of this Hyperborean god in the contest with other gods. 

1. Cassius Dio, Roman History, 51.1. 

2. Augustine, De civitate dei, 4.26. 

129 



The World of Trlidiiioii 


GfifriES mid Victors 


Likewise, the Olympian games were related to the idea of the triumph of the heav¬ 
enly race over the race of Titans. Heracles, the demigod who was the ally of the 
Olympian hosts in the struggle against the Giants, was believed to have instituted 
the Olympian games 3 4 and to have symbolically taken the olive branch with which 
the winners were crowned from the land of the Hyperboreans.' 1 These games had a 
rigorously virile character; women were absolutely forbidden to attend them. Be¬ 
sides, it was not a coincidence that in the Roman arenas several numbers and sacred 
symbols appeared repeatedly: the three, in the temae summitates metarum [the tops 
of the three columns] and in the tres arae Hints Diis magnis potentibus valentibus 
[three altars for the triple gods, the Great, the Potent, the Prevailing] that Tertullian 5 
attributed to the great Samothracian Triad; the five in the five spatia of the Domitian 
racetracks, the zodiac s twelve in the number of doors from which the chariots en¬ 
tered and exited in the early empire; the seven in the annual games at the time of the 
Republic, in the number of altars of the planetary gods in the Circus Maximus' 1 7 (with 
the sun’s pyramid at the top), in the total number of rounds of a complete race, and in 
the “eggs,” “dolphins,” or “tritons” located in each of these seven curricula.'' Bachofen 
has noticed that the egg and the triton symbolically referred to the fundamental dual¬ 
ism of the powers at work in the world; the egg represented the generating matter 
that encompasses every potentiality, while the triton or sea horse, sacred to Poseidon- 
Neptune and a frequent symbol of the waves, expressed the same fecundating phal¬ 
lic and telluric power whereby, according to a tradition reported by Plutarch, the 
cument of the waters of the Nile was thought to represent the fecundating sperm of 
the primordial male spilled on Isis, herself a symbol of the land of Egypt. This duality 
was reflected in the very location where the ancient games and equiria [horse races 
dedicated to Mars] were held. Tarquinius had his circus built in the valley between 
the Aventine and the Palatine, which was sacred to Murcia (a feminine-telluric god¬ 
dess); the tracks of the equiria began at the Tiber’s banks and the finish line was 
marked with swords planted into Mars’ field. Thus, heroic and virile symbols were 
found at the end of the tracks (telos) while the feminine and the material element of 
generation, namely, flowing waters or whatever was sacred to chthonic deities, was 
found at the beginning of and alongside the tracks. 

In this way, action took place in the context of material symbols representing 
higher meanings, so that “the magical method and technique” hidden in the ludi 

3. Pindar, The Olympian Odes. 3; 10.42; Diodorus, 4.14. 

4. Pindar, The Olympian Odes, 3.13; Pliny the Elder, Historia naturalis. 16.240. 

5- Tertullian, De spectaculis, 8. 

6. Lidius, De mensibus, l .4.12. 

7. The undeniable symbolism of various details found in Roman circuses is one of the traces of the presence 

of sacred knowledge in the ancient construction art. 


(which always began with solemn sacrifices and were often celebrated to invoke 
divine powers at times of an imminent national danger) could have a greater effi¬ 
cacy. The impetus of the horses and the vertigo of the race through seven rounds, 
which was also compared with and consecrated to the sun’s “journey” in the sky, 8 
evoked the mystery of the cosmic current at work in the “cycle of generation” ac¬ 
cording to the planetary hierarchy. The ritual slaying of the victorious horse, which 
was consecrated to Mars, should be connected to the general idea of “sacrifice”; it 
seems that the force that was consequently unleashed was for the most part directed 
by the Romans to increase the crops in an occult fashion, ad frugum eventum. (This 
sacrifice may be considered as the equivalent of the Indo-Aryan asvamedha, which 
originally was a magical, ritual, propitiating power.) The Roman ritual was celebrated 
in extraordinary occasions, for instance at the time of declaration of war or after a 
victory. Two horsemen entered into the arena, one from the east and the other from 
the west, to engage in mortal combat; the original colors of the two factions, which 
were the same colors of the Orphic cosmic egg—white symbolizing winter and red 
symbolizing summer (or better, the former symbolizing the lunar-chthonic power, 
the latter the solar-Uranian power 9 )—evoked the struggle of the two great elemen¬ 
tal forces. Every goal, meta sudans, was considered as a “living” thing (MOoq 
£fi\jWXOq); the altar erected in honor of the god Consus (“He who gathers in, a 
demon who fed on the blood spilled in the violent games, or rnunera) at one of the 
finish lines of the circus, which was unveiled only on the occasion of the games, 
appeared as the outlet of infernal forces, just like its Etruscan counterpart, puteai 
Higher up, statues of triumphant deities were erected, which referred to the opposite 
Uranian principle, so that the circus was transformed into a council of numina 
(daemonum concilium ) 10 whose invisible presence was ritually sanctioned by seats 
left purposefully vacant. Thus, what on the one hand appeared as the unfolding of 
action in an athletic, competitive, or scenic event, on the other hand was elevated to 
the plane of a magical evocation. The risk inherent in this evocation was real in a 
wider order than that of the lives of the participants in the certamina, whose victory 
renewed and strengthened in the individual and in the collectivity the victory of the 

8. In antiquity the god Sol had a temple in the middle of the circus; the circuit races were sacred to this god 
who was represented as steering the chariot of the sun. In Olympia there were twelve rounds 
{dodekagnamptos, see Pindar, Olympian Odes, 2.50) that represented the position of the sun in the zodiac. 
Cassius Dio relates that the Roman circus represented the sequence of the four seasons. 

9. These Roman games are connected with analogous traditions found in other Indo-European stocks. During 
the feast of Mahavrata, which was celebrated in ancient India during the winter solstice, a representative 
of the white and divine Aryan caste fought against a representative of the dark caste of the sQdras for the 
possession of an object symbolizing the sun. In an ancient Nordic saga we find the periodic combat be¬ 
tween two knights, one riding a white and the other a black horse, in the proximity of a symbolic tree. 

10. “The concourse of demons,” in Tertullian, De spectaculis, 8. 


130 


131 




The World of Trrditioh 

Uranian forces over the infernal forces, a victory that became transformed into a 
principle of "‘destiny” For instance, Apollo’s games were instituted on the occasion 
of the Punic Wars as a protection against the danger foretold by the oracle; they 
were repeated to ward off an epidemic of plague, and eventually they came to be 
celebrated periodically. Thus, during the parade preceding the games, the images 
(exuviae) of the Capitol gods, protectors of Rome, were solemnly earned from the 
Capitol to the circus in consecrated chariots (tensae); special regard was paid to the 
exuviae of Jovis Optimi Maximi (the thunderbolt, the scepter surmounted by the 
eagle, and the golden crown), which were also the symbols of the imperium. This 
was done with the assumption that the same occult power inherent in Roman sover¬ 
eignty witnessed to and participated in the games consecrated to it (ludi Romani) or 
that it was involved in them. The magistrate who was elected to preside over the 
games led the parade that carried the divine symbols as if he were a conqueror: he 
was surrounded by his people and followed by a public slave holding over his head a 
crown of oak leaves encrusted with gold and diamonds. It is probable that in the 
early games the quadriga was a symbol of Jupiter’s attributes and an insignia of 
triumphal royalty; an ancient quadriga of Etruscan origins kept in a Capitoline temple 
was considered by the Romans as a pledge of their future prosperity. 

This explains why those games that were not performed according to tradition 
were looked down upon as unorthodox sacred rituals; if their representation were 
upset by an accident or interrupted for any reason, it was considered an omen of bad 
luck and a curse, and the games had to be started all over again in order to "placate” 
the divine powers. Conversely, according to a famous legend, when the people, fob 
’owing a surprise attack by the enemy, left the games (which in the meantime were 
lot interrupted) in order to take up arms, they found the enemy miraculously routed 
)y a supernatural power that was later on identified with the power evoked by the 
rite of the game dedicated to the savior Apollo. 11 If the games were often conse¬ 
crated to Victories” that personified the triumphant power, their purpose was to 
renew the life and presence of such a power, to nourish it with the new energies that 
were awakened and that imparted the same direction. This explains why, m specific 
reference to the certamina and to the munera , the winner appeared to be endowed 
with a divine character and at times to be a temporary incarnation of a deity. In 
Olympia, in the moment of triumph, the winner was thought to be an incarnation of 
the local Zeus, and the public acclamation to the victorious gladiator was incorpo- 
tated into the ancient Christian liturgy: Eigamvagano aicbvoq [forever and ever]. 12 

11. Macrobius, The Saturn*,io, Ul.25. See also the Platonic saying: “Their victory [the Olympian winncrs| 
is the nobler, since by their success the whole commonwealth is preserved." Republic. 4 b5d 

12. Tertullian, De spectaculis, 25. 


GnmEs odd Victory 

What should really be considered in this context is what land of inner (besides ritual 
and magical) meaning the event may have had for the individual. What has been said 
about the notion of “holy war” applies in this context as well: the heroic exaltation found 
in competition and in victory, once it was given a ritual meaning, became the imita¬ 
tion of, or the introduction to, that higher and purer impetus the initiate used to defeat 
death. This explains the frequent references to the certamina, to the games of the cir¬ 
cus, and to the figures of winners in classical funerary art; all these references immor¬ 
talized in an analogical way the highest hope of the deceased, and visibly portrayed 
the kind of action most likely to help him overcome Hades and obtain the glory of an 
eternal life in a way conforming to the traditional path of action. What we find over 
and over again in sarcophagi, funerary urns, and classical bas-reliefs are the images 
of a “triumphal death”: winged Victories open the doors of the otherworld’s domain, 
or uphold the medallion of the deceased or crown him with the evergreen that usually 
crowns the heads of the initiates. In the context of the Pindaric celebration of the di¬ 
vinity of victorious wrestlers, the Enagogues and the Promachi were portrayed as 
mystical, deities leading the souls to immortality. And vice versa: in Orphism, every 
victory (Nike) became the symbol of the victory of the soul over the body, and those 
who achieved initiation were called the “heroes” of a dramatic and endless smuggle. 
What in the myth is the expression of a heroic life, constitutes the model of an Orphic 
life; therefore in the sepulchral images, Heracles, Theseus, the Dioscuri, Achilles, and 
others are designated as Oiphic initiates: crcpaTdq ( militia in Latin) is the term desig¬ 
nating the host of initiates, and pvacnarpotToq the term designating the Mystery’s 
hierophant. Light, victory, and initiation were eventually represented next to each other 
in several Hellenic monuments. Helios, as the rising sun (alias Aurora) is a Nike and 
is endowed with a triumphal chariot; other Nikai wereTeletes, Mystis, and other dei¬ 
ties or personifications of the transcendent rebirth. When we go from the symbolic and 
esoteric to the magical aspect, it should be noted that the competitions and the warrioi 
dances celebrated on the occasion of a hero’s death (the Roman equivalent were the 
ludi celebrated at the funerals of major figures) had the purpose of awakening a mys¬ 
tical, saving force that was supposed to accompany and strengthen him during the cri¬ 
sis that occurred at the moment of death. People also paid homage to the heroes by 
periodically repeating the contests that followed their funerals. 

All this is typical of a traditional civilization qualified by the “pole” of action 
rather than by the “pole” of contemplation: action as spirit and spirit as action. As far 
as Greece is concerned, I have already mentioned that in Olympia, action in the 
form of “games” exercised a unifying function beyond the particularism of the city- 
states similar to that function manifested through action as “holy war,” as in the case 
of the supemational phenomenon of the Crusades or, in the context of Islam, during 
the period of the First Caliphate. 


132 


133 



The World of tomon 


Grides hud Vim 


There are plenty of elements that enable us to perceive the innermost aspect of 
such traditions. I have pointed out that in antiquity the notions of sou], of “double” or 
daemon, and later on of Furies or Erinyes, and finally of the goddess of death and the 
goddess of victory were often confused in the same one notion, so much so as to 
establish the notion of a deity who is simultaneously goddess of battles and a tran¬ 
scendental element of the human soul. 

Tins was the case, for instance, with the notions of fylgja (Nordic tradition) and 
of the fravashi (Iranian), The fylgja , which literally means “the escort,” was con¬ 
ceived as a spiritual entity dwelling in every man; she may be perceived in special 
times, for instance at the time of death or of mortal danger. The fylgja was confused 
with the hugir, the equivalent of the soul, but was also believed to be a supernatural 
powei (fylgjukoma), namely, the spirit of both the individual and of his stock 
(kynfylgja). But the fylgja was often portrayed as the equivalent of the valkyrie , 
who in turn was conceived as an entity of “fate” leading the individual to victory and 
to a heroic death. The same was true for the fravashi of the ancient Iranian tradition, 
the terrifying goddesses of war who “give victory, health, and good Glory to those 
who invoke them,” while appearing as “the inner power in every being that main¬ 
tains it and makes it grow and subsist” 15 and as “the everlasting and deified souls of 
the dead” 14 in relation to the mystical power of the stock, as in the Hindu pip*and in 
the Latin manes. 

I have already discussed this kind ot “life’s life,” or deep-seated power of life 
hidden behind the body and the state of finite consciousness. Here it will suffice to 
say that one’s guiding principle (Socipov) or “double” transcends every personal and 
particular foim in which it is manifested; thus, the abrupt and sudden shift from the 
ordinary state of individuated consciousness to the state characterized by such a 
dnciple would usually have the meaning of a destructive crisis, which effectively 
ikes place after death. If we conceive that in some special circumstances the double 
nay burst into one s conscious “I” and manifest itself according to its destructive 
transcendence, the meaning of the first of the abovementioned assimilations will 
become apparent; hence the “double” (or man’s guiding principle) and the deity of 
death that manifests itself (e.g., as a valkyrie) at the moment of death or in circum¬ 
stances of mortal danger, become one and the same. In the asceticism of a religious 
and mystical type, self-mortification, renunciation of one’s self, and devotion to God 
aie the pteferred means that are employed to induce and to overcome the 
abovementioned crisis. According to the other path to transcendence, however, the 

13. Ynsht, 13.23-24; 66-67. 

14. ZendAvesta, irons. S. Darmesteter, in Sacred Books of the East, ed. M. Moeller (Oxford, 1883), 179. 


means to induce this crisis consist in the active exaltation and awakening of the 
element of “action” in a pure state. At an inferior level dance was used as a sacred 
method to attract and to manifest various divinities and invisible powers through the 
ecstasy of the soul: this was the orgiastic, shamanistic, Bacchic, Maenadic, and 
Coiybantic theme. In ancient Rome too there were sacred priestly dances performed 
by the Luperchi and by the Arvali; the words of the Arvalfs hymnal “Help us, O 
Mars; dance! dance!” already show the relationship between dance and war, which 
was sacred to Mars. 15 Another life, unleashed by the rhythm, was grafted onto the 
life of the dancer, representing the emergence of the abyssal root of the previous life 
dramatized by the lari as lares ludentes or as Cureti ,fS by the Furies, by the Erinyes, 
and by the wild .spiritual entities that have attributes similar to Zagreus (“Great- 
hunter-who-destroys-everything-on-his-path”). These were manifestations of the 
guiding principle in its fearful and active transcendence. At a higher level there were 
the games as nmnera , namely, as sacred games, and war. In the clear-minded in¬ 
ebriation and in the heroic elan generated in the struggle and in the tension for vic¬ 
tory (in the games, but especially in war), Tradition recognized the opportunity to 
undergo an analogous experience: it appears that even etymologically, /udere con¬ 
veyed the idea of “untying,” which esoterically referred to the ability usually found 
in competition to untie the individual bond and to reveal deep-seated powers. Hence 
a further assimilation through which the guiding principle and the goddess of death 
not only are identical to the Furies and to the Erinyes, but to the goddesses of war 
known as the Valkyrie, virgin warriors who magically strike the enemy with a frantic 
panic ( herfjoturr), and to the fravashi , who are “terrible, omnipotent powers who 
attack impetuously.” 

These powers were eventually transformed into goddesses such as Victory or 
Nike, into the lar victor, into the larMartis etpacis triumphal is, and into lares, who ir 
Rome were considered as “demigods who have founded the city and instituted the 
Empire ” 17 This further transfonnation corresponds to the positive outcome of suet 
experiences. Just as the “double” signified the deep powei' at a latent state in rela^ 
tion to the external consciousness; just as the goddess of death dramatized the sensa- 

13, The name of yet another priestly college (the Salii) is usually derived from satire or saitare ("to climb” or 
"to jump"). According to the Muslim mystic Jelaluddin Ruini, "He who knows Lhc power of dance dwells 
in God, since he knows that love slays.” 

16. E. Saglio, Dictionnuirc dcs antiquities grecques et remains d’npres les testes ct ies monuments, 6.947. 
The Cureti, armed dancers who engaged in orgies (arkestercs aspidephoroi), were regarded as demigods 
endowed with the power to initiate and also as the "child's rearers" or pandotrophoi (See J, E. Harrison, 
Themis [Cambridge, 1912|, 23-27), that is, as the mentors of the new principle that emerges through 
similar experiences. 

17. E. Saglio, Dictionnnire. 6.944. 


134 


135 



The World of Troditioo 


Gaeues add Victory 


tion of the manifestation of this power as a principle of crisis for the essence of the 
empirical self; and just as the Furies and the Erinyes or the lares ludentes reflected a 
particular way for this power to become unleashed and to burst out—likewise, the 
goddess Victoria and the lar victor expressed the triumph over this power, the “two 
merging into one/’ and the triumphant passage to the state that lies beyond the dan¬ 
ger of the formless ecstasy and dissolution occurring at the precise frantic moment of 
action. 

Moreover, wherever the actions of the spirit take place within the body of real 
actions and events (unlike what takes place in the domain of contemplative asceti¬ 
cism), a real parallelism can be established between the physica l and the metaphysi¬ 
cal, the visible and the invisible; therefore those actions can appear as the occult 
counterpart of warrior feats or of competitive events, that ha ve a real victory as their 
climax. Then the material victory reflects a corresponding spiritual event that has 
determined it alongside the previously disclosed paths of the energies connecting the 
inside to the outside; in other words, it appears as the real sign of an initiation and of 
a mystical epiphany taking place simultaeously. The warrior and the military leader 
who faced the Furies and Death in a real way, met them simultaneously within him¬ 
self, in his spirit, under the form of dangerous manifestations of powers emerging from 
his abyssal nature; by triumphing over them, he achieved victory. 18 This is why in clas¬ 
sical traditions every victory often acquired a sacred meaning; in the imperator , in the 
hero, and in the leader who was acclaimed victorious on the battlefield—just as in the 
winner of the sacred ludi— it was possible to detect the abrupt manifestation of a 
mystical force that transformed him and made him more than a human being. One of 
the warrior customs practiced by the Romans, which is susceptible to an esoteric in¬ 
terpretation, was the act of carrying the victorious general on shields. Ennius (239- 
169 b.c.) had previously assimilated the shield to the vault of heaven (altisonum coeti 
clupeurn) and the shield was sacred in the temple of the Olympian Jupiter. In the third 

18. The Nordic view, according to which battles arc won thanks to the Valkyrie, expresses the idea that the 
outcome of a fight is determined by these powers rather than by human strength in a materialistic and 
individualistic sense. In the ancient Roman world we often find the idea of the manifestation of a tran¬ 
scendent power. This manifestation was sometimes expressed through the voice of the god Faunus that 
was heard by the troops before a battle and that filled the enemy with a holy terror. We also find the idea 
that it is sometimes necessary to sacrifice a leader in order to actualize this presence, according to the 
general meaning of ritual slayings; this was the rite of devotio, the sacrifice of the leader that unleashed 
infernal powers and the genius of terror onto the enemy. The minute the leader died, the panic and horror 
that corresponded to the power liberated from the body was manifested; this horror could be compared to 
the herfjoturr, the panic and terror that were magically transmitted by the unleashed Valkyrie to the 
enemy. One of the last echoes of similar meanings was found in the Japanese kamikaze during World 
War II; the word kamikaze referred to the suicide pilots unleashed against the enemy, and it means 
“divine wind." On the fuselages of their planes there was the inscription; "You are gods who are free 
from all human yearnings." 


century the title of imperator became one and the same with that of victor and the 
ceremony of triumph, more than a military parade, was a sacred ceremony in honor 
of the supreme Capitoline god. The winner appeared as the living image of Jupiter and 
proceeded to put into the hands of this god the triumphal laurel of his victory. The tri¬ 
umphal chariot was the symbol of Jupiter’s cosmic quadriga and the insignia of the 
leader corresponded to those of the god. The symbolism of “Victories,” Valkyries, or 
analogous entities leading the souls of the fallen heroes to the “heavens,” or the sym¬ 
bolism of a triumphant hero who, like Heracles, receives from Nike the crown reserved 
for those who partake of the Olympian immortality, becomes clear and completes what 
has been said so far about the holy war. We are in the context of traditions in which 
victory acquires the meaning of immortality similar to that bestowed in an initiation, 
and in which Victory appears as the mediatrix because of either her participation in 
transcendence or the manifestation of transcendence into a body of power. The Islamic 
idea according to which the wamors slain in a “holy war” (jihad) have never really 
died 19 should be referred to the same principle. 

Last but not least, the victory of a leader was often regarded by the Romans 
as a separate entity (numen), the mysterious life of which constituted the focus of 
a special cult; feasts, sacred games, rituals, and sacrifices were destined to renew 
its presence. The Victoria Caesaris is the best example of this. Being the equiva¬ 
lent of an initiatory or “sacrificial” action, every victory was believed to generate 
an entity that was distinct from the destiny and from the particular individuality of 
the mortal being from which it derived; just as in the case of the victory of the 
divine ancestors, this entity was believed to be capable of establishing a line of 
special spiritual influences. And as in the case of the cult of the divine ancestors, 
such influences needed to be confirmed and developed through rites acting in accord 
with the laws of sympathy and analogy. Therefore, it was mainly through games 
and competitions that the victoriae as numina were periodically celebrated. The 
regularity of this competitive cult, which was decreed by law, had the power to 
materialize a “presence” that was ready to join the forces of the race in an occult 
fashion and lead them toward a good outcome in order to transform new victories 
into the means necessary for the revelation, and for the strengthening of the energy 
of the original victory. Thus, in Rome, once the celebration of the deceased Caesar 
was confused with that of his victory, and once regular games were dedicated to 

19. See the enigmatic saying in the Koran (2:153): "Do not say thanhose who were slain in the cause of Allah 
are dead; they are alive, although you arc not aware of them." Plato also wrote: "And of those who arc 
slain in the field, we shall say that all who fell with honor are of that golden race, who when they die, 
according to Hesiod, ‘Dwell here on earth, pure spirits, beneficent. Guardians to shield us mortal men 
from harm.”' ( Republic , 468e). 


136 


137 




The World of tauon 


Guts add ViooRy 


the Victoria Caesaris, it became possible to see in him a “perennial winner.” 20 

The cult of Victory, believed to predate history, 21 may be considered, generally 
speaking, as the secret soul of the Roman greatness and fides. Since the times of 
Augustus, the statue of the goddess Victory had been placed on the altar of the Ro¬ 
man Senate; according to a traditional custom, any senator heading for his seat was 
expected first to approach that altar in order to bum some incense on it. That force 
was thus believed to preside invisibly over the deliberations ot the Curia: hands 
were raised toward it when an oath of faithfulness was pronounced upon the advent 
of a new Caesar, and also on every January third when solemn vows were made for 
the well-being of the emperor and for the prosperity of the empire. This was the most 
resilient Roman cult, and the last to fall under the onslaught of Christianity. 

No belief was more strongly upheld by the Romans than the belief that the divine 
powers were responsible for creating Rome’s greatness and for supporting its 
aetemitas 22 md, consequently, thata war, before being won on the battle fields, had to 
be won or at least actuated in a mystical way, Following the defeat at Lake Trasimene 
(217 b.c.), Fabius told his soldiers: “Your fault consists in having neglected the sacri¬ 
fices and in having ignored the declarations of the augurs rather than in having lacked 
courage or ability.” 23 It was also an article of faith that in order to take a city it was 
necessary first to cause its tutelary god to abandon it. 24 No war was initiated without 
sacrifices; a special college of priests (fetiales) was entrusted with the rites pertaining 
to war. The bottom line of the Roman art of war was not to be forced to light if the gods 
were opposed to it. Themistocles said: “The gods and heroes performed these deeds, 
not us.” 25 Again, the real focus of everything was the sacrum. Supernatural actions were 
invoked to assist human actions and to infuse in them the mystical power of Victory. 26 


20. Cassius Dio, Roman History, 45.7. 

21. Dionysius of Halicarnassus, 1,32.5. 

22. Cicero, De natura deorum, 2.3.8; Plutarch, Life of Romulus, 1.8. 

23. Livy, History of Rome, 17.9; 31.5; 36.2; 42.2. Plutarch tells us: '-To such a decree did the Romans make 
everything depend upon the wilt of the gods, and so intolerant were they of any neglect of omens and 
ancestral rites, even when attended by the greatest success, considering it of more importance for the 
safety of the city that their magistrates should reverence sacred things than that they should overcome 
their enemies.” Marcellus, 4.4. 

24. Macrobius, Saturnalia, 3,9.2. Servius, Ad Aeneidem, 2.244. 

25. Herodotus, The Persian Wars, 8.109.19. 

26. In savage populations we still find characteristic echoes of these views, which should not he considered 

superstitious provided they are properly contextualized and interpreted. According in these popula¬ 
tions, war, in the last analysis, is a confrontation between warlocks. Victor,- goes to those who have the 
more powerful “war medicine” with every other apparent factor, including the equal courage of the 
warriors, being just a consequence. 


Since I have mentioned action and heroism as traditional values, it is expedient 
to underline the difference between them and the forms that, a few exceptions not¬ 
withstanding, can be seen in our day and age. The difference consists, once again, in 
the lack of the dimension of transcendence, and thus of an orientation that, even when 
it is not dictated by pure instinct and blind force, does not lead to a true “opening” but 
rather generates qualities that are destined to bestow on the empirical subject only a 
dark and tragic splendor. In the case of ascetical values we find an analogous alter¬ 
ation that deprives asceticism of every enlightening element as one goes from the 
notion of asceticism to that of ethics, especially in relation to moral doctrines such as 
the Kantian and the Stoic ethical systems. Every morality (in its higher versions, such 
as Kant’s “autonomous morality”), is nothing but secularized asceticism; as such it is 
only a surviving stump and it lacks a real foundation. Thus, the critique of the mod¬ 
ern “free spirits,” Nietzsche included, could easily dismiss the values and the impera¬ 
tives of the morality improperly designated as “traditional” (“improperly,” because 
in a traditional civilization no morality enjoyed an autonomous dimension). Our con¬ 
temporaries, however, have fallen to an even lowerlevel in the shift that occurred from 
the “autonomous” and categorically imperative morality to a utilitarian and “social” 
morality affected by a fundamental relativity and contingency. 

As is the case with asceticism in general, when heroism and action are not aimed 
at leading back one’s personality to its true center, they are nothing but an artificial 
“device” that begins and ends with man; as such they do not acquire a meaning or a 
value beyond that of sensation, exaltation, and frantic impulsiveness. Such is, almost 
without exception, the case of the modern cult of action. Even when everything is not 
reduced to a cultivation of “reflexes” and to a control of elementary reactions, as in the 
case of war on the frontline (considering the advanced degree of mechanization of the 
modem varieties of action), it is almost inevitable for man to seek out and to feed him¬ 
self with existentially liminal experiences wherever they are to be found. Moreover, 
the plane is often shifted to collective and subpersonal forces, the incarnation of which 
is furthered by the “ecstasy” associated with heroism, sport, and action. 

The heroic myth based on individualism, voluntarism, and a superman attitude 
constitutes a dangerous deviation in our modern era; on its basis the individual, 

Precluding to himself all possibilities of extraindividual and extrahuman 
development, assumes—by virtue of a diabolical construction—the prin¬ 
ciple of his insignificant physical will as an absolute reference point 
and assails the external “phantasm” by opposing to it the phantasm of 
his own self It is ironic that when confronting this contaminating in¬ 
sanity, he who realizes what game these poor and more or less heroic 


138 


139 



The World of Trade™ 


Galiies riid Victors 


individuals are playing, recalls Confucius’ advice according to which 
every reasonable person has the duty to safeguard his own life in view 
of the development of the only possibilities by virtue of which a man 
truly deserves to be called a man . 27 

The fact remains that modern man needs these degraded and desecrated forms of 
action as if they were some kind of drug; he needs them to elude the sense of his 
inner emptiness, to be aware of himself, and to find in exasperated sensations the 
surrogate for the true meaning of life. One of the characteristics of the Western 
“Dark Age” (Kali Yuga) is a sort of Titanic restlessness that knows no limitations 
and that induces an existential fever and awakens new sources of elation and of 
stupefaction. 

Before continuing, I need to mention an aspect of the traditional spirit that is 
related to the Law and to the views expounded so far. I am talking about various 
ordeals of character and so-called divine judgments. 

Quite often the test of truth, right, justice, and innocence was made to depend on 
a trial that consisted of a decisive action (experimentum crucis). Just as the law was 
traditionally believed to have a divine origin, likewise injustice was considered to be 
a violation of the divine Law and to be detectable through the outcome of a human 
action that had been given an adequate orientation. A Germanic custom consisted of 
delving into the divine will through the test of arms as a particular form of oracle 
mediated by action; the idea that original ly was at the basis of the custom of chal¬ 
lenging somebody to a duel is not very different. Starting with the principle: “de 
coelo est fortitude )” (Annules Fuldenses), this principle was eventually extended to 
feuding states and nations. A battle as late as that of Fonteney (a.d. 841) was con¬ 
ceived as a “divine judgment” that was invoked to establish the rights of two broth¬ 
ers both claiming the legacy of Charlemagne. When a battle was fought in this spirit, 
it followed special rules: the winner was forbidden to loot and to exploit suategically 
and territorially the successful outcome, and both sides were expected to tend equally 
to the fallen and to the wounded. According to the general view that was preserved 
through the entire Carolingian period, however, even when the idea of a specific 
proof was not required, victory and defeat were felt to be signs “from above” estab¬ 
lishing justice or injustice, truth or guilt. In the legend of the combat between Roland 
and Ferragus and in analogous themes of chivalrous literature, we can see that dur¬ 
ing the Middle Ages people believed that the test of arms was the criterion capable 
of assessing the truer faith. 

In other instances the trial consisted in the induction of a paranormal phenomenon. 

21. G. Dc Giorgio, “La conieinplazione c Lazione,’’ Lu Torre, no. 7 (1930). 


This was the case of classical antiquity too: according to a Roman tradition, a vestal 
virgin suspected of sacrilege demonstrated her own innocence by carrying water from 
the Tiber River in a sieve. There was also the custom, which is not confined to the 
degenerative forms that have survived among savage populations, of challenging a 
suspect who claimed his or her own innocence to ingest a poison or a substance induc¬ 
ing vomit; if the substance induced the usual effects, the charge was validated. Dur¬ 
ing the Middle Ages analogous voluntary ordeals were found not only in the context 
of temporal justice, but in the sacred domain too; monks and even bishops agreed to 
submit themselves to such a criterion in order to establish the truth of their claims in 
matters of doctrine. 2 * Even torture, which was conceived as a means to interrogate 
prisoners, was originally related to the notion of “divine judgment.” Truth was believed 
to have an almost magical power; it was a common belief that no torture could under¬ 
mine the inner truth of an innocent person and of somebody who was telling the truth. 

There is a clear connection between all this and the mystical character tradition¬ 
ally associated with “victory.” In these trials, including the trial of arms, God was 
“called” as a witness by the participants in order for them to receive from Him a su¬ 
pernatural sign that would then be used as a judgment. It is possible to rise from the lower 
level of these naive theistic representations to the purer form of the traditional idea, 
according to which truth, law, and justice ultimately appear as the manifestations of a 
metaphysical order conceived as a reality that the state of truth and of justice in man 
lias the power to evoke in an objective way. In antiquity the overworld was conceived 
of as a reality in the higher sense of the word, superior to the laws of nature and capable 
of manifesting itself in this world every time one opened oneself to it without reserva¬ 
tions and concern for one's self; in the next stage the individual entered into certain 
psychic states (the already mentioned heroic, competitive state that “unties” the extreme 
tension of the ordeal and of the danger being faced) that were destined to open the 
closed human “circuits” to wider “circuits,” and through which it was possible to gen¬ 
erate unusual and apparently miraculous effects. This view explains and gives the 
proper meaning to traditions and customs such as the abovementioned ones. In the order 
of these customs, truth and reality, might and law, victory and justice formed one thing 
having the supernatural as their center of gravity. 

These views were destined to be regarded as pure superstition wherever 

28, Around the year a.d, 506, during the reign of Emperor Athanasius, a Catholic bishop proposed to an Arian 
bishop to undergo the test of fire in order to determine which one of the two faiths was the true one. After 
the Arian refused, the Catholic entered the fire and exited unscathed. This power was also attributed to 
the priests of Apollo: super ambustam ligni struem ambulances, non aduri tradebantur says Pliny (7.2). 
The same idea is also found on a higher plane: according to the ancient Iranian idea, at the “end of the 
world” all people will have to go through a fiery current; the ‘‘righteous” will not be harmed but the evil 
ones will be consumed by the flames. Bundahesh, 30.18. 


140 


141 



The World of Traditiofi 


“progress” systematically deprived the human virtues of any possibility of establish¬ 
ing an objective contact with a superior order of things. Once man’s strength was 
thought to be on the same level as that of animals, that is, as the faculty of mechani¬ 
cal action in a being who is not at all connected to what transcends him as an indi¬ 
vidual, the trial oi strength obviously becomes meaningless and the outcome of ev¬ 
ery competition becomes entirely contingent and lacking a potential relation with an 
order of higher “values.” Once the ideas of truth, law, and justice were turned into 
abstractions or social conventions; once the sensation, thanks to which in Aryan In¬ 
dia it was possible to say, The earth has truth as its foundation,” was forgotten; once 
every peiception of these values as objective and almost physical apparitions of 
the supernatural amid the network of contingencies was lost—then it is natural to 
wonder how truth, law, and justice could possibly influence the determination of the 
phenomena and facts that science, until recently, has decreed not to be susceptible to 
modification . 19 Nowadays, decisions with regard to what is true or right as well as 
matters of innocence and guilt are left to the clamor of pettifoggers, the laborious 
promulgation of legal documents, the lengthy paragraphs of laws that are “equal for 
everybody” and made omnipotent by the secularized states and the plebeian masses 
who rule themselves without kings and self-appointed rulers. Conversely, the proud 
self-assurance with which traditional man reacted valiantly and superindividually 
against the unrighteous, armed with faith and the sword, and the spiritual impassibil¬ 
ity that placed him in an a priori, absolute relation to a supernatural power not sub¬ 
ject to the power of the el ements, sensations, and natura 1 laws—a 11 these things have 
come to be considered mere “superstitions.” 

In this context too, the decline of traditional values has been followed by then- 
inversion ; an inversion that can be seen at work wherever the modem world makes 
a profession of “realism” and seems to take up again the idea of an identity of victory 
and law with the principle might is right.” Since this is might in the highest material 
sense of the word—or better, if we refer to war in its most recent forms, in an almost 
demonic sense (since the technical and industrial potential has become the most 
decisive factor)—then we can see that discussions about “values” and righteousness 
are merely rhetorical. Such rhetoric is employed through big words and a hypocriti¬ 
cal declamation of principles as a means in the service of an ugly will to power. This 
is a particular upheaval characterizing the last times, more on which later. 

29. I said “until recently” because modern metapsychical researches have established the existence of 
paranormal powers latent in man that can become objectively manifested and modify the network of 
physical and chemical phenomena. In addition to the fact that it would have been unlikely for the practice 
of divine judgment to be continued for such a long time if no extranormal phenomenon were ever 
produced, the said metapsychical findings ought to modify the common opinion regarding the "supersti¬ 
tious” variations of the so-called divine trials. 


19 


Space, Time, the Earth 


I have previously pointed out that the difference between traditional and modem 
man is not simply a matter of mentality and type of civilization; rather, the dif¬ 
ference concerns the experiential possibilities available to each and the way in which 
the world of nature is experienced according to the categories of perception and the 
fundamental relationship between I and not-I. For traditional man space, time, and 
causality had a very different character than they have in the experience of modern 
man. The mistake of epistemology from Kant on is to assume that these fundamental 
forms of human experience have always remained the same, especially those with 
which we are most familiar in recent times. On the contrary, even in this aspect it is 
possible to notice a deep transformation that reflects the general involutive process 
at work in history. With this said, I will limit myself to discussing the difference in the 
perception of space and time. 

As I mentioned in the foreword, my main contention is that time in traditional 
civilizations was not a linear, “historical” time. Time and becoming are related to 
what is superior to time; in this way the perception of time undergoes a spiritual 
transformation. 

In order to clarify this point it is necessary to explain what time means today. Time 
is perceived as the simple irreversible order of consecutive events; its parts are mu¬ 
tually homogeneous and therefore can be measured in a quantitative fashion. More¬ 
over, a distinction is made between “before” and “later” (namely, between past and 
future) in reference to a total ly relative (the present) point in time, But whether an event 
is past or future, whether it takes place in one or another point in time, does not con¬ 
fer upon it any special quality; it merely makes it a dateable event, that’s all. In other 
words, there is some kind of reciprocal indifference between time and its contents. The 
temporality of these contents simply means that they are carried along by a continu¬ 
ous current that never inverts its course and in which every moment, while being dif¬ 
ferent from all others, is also equal to all others. In the most recent scientific theories 
(such as Minkowski’s and Einstein’s) time even loses this particular character. 


142 


143 



Tut World of Tradition 


Space, Time, the Earth 


Scientists talk about the relativity of time, of time as space’s “fourth dimension” and 
so on; this means that time becomes a mathematical order per se that is absolutely in¬ 
different with regard to events, which may thus be located in a “before” rather than 
in an “after,” depending on the reference system being adopted. 

The traditional expeiience of time was of a very different kind; time was not 
regarded quantitatively but rather qualitatively; not as a series, but as rhythm. It did 
not flow uniformly and indefinitely, but was broken down into cycles and periods in 
which every moment had its own meaning and specific value in relation to all others, 
as well as a lively individuality and functionality. Each of these cycles or periods 
(the Chaldean and Hellenic “great year”; the Etruscan or Latin saeculum; the Ira¬ 
nian aeon; the Aztec “suns”; the Hindu kalpas) represented a complete development 
forming closed and perfect units that were identical to each other; although they 
reoccurred they did not change nor did they multiply, but rather followed each other, 
according to Hubert-Mauss’s fitting expression, as a “series of eternities.” 1 Since this 
wholeness was not quantitative but organic, the chronological duration of the saeculum 
was ephemeral. Quantitatively different periods of time were regarded as equal, 
provided that each of them contained and reproduced all the typical phases of a 
cycle. And so, certain numbers such as seven, nine, twelve, and one thousand were 
traditionally employed not to express quantities, but rather typical structures of rhythm; 
thus they had different durations though they remained symbolically equivalent. 

Accordingly, instead of an indefinite chronological sequence, the traditional world 
knew a hierarchy based on analogical correspondences between great and small 
cycles; the result was a sort of reduction of the temporal manifold to the supertemporal 
unity. 2 Since the small cycle reproduced analogically the great cycle, this created the 
possibility of participation in ever greater orders and in durations increasingly free 
from all residues of matter or contingency, until what was reached was some kind of 
space-time continuum. 3 * By ordering time “from above” so that every duration was 

1. Hubert-Mauss, Melange d'histoire religieuse, 207. According lo the Chaldeans, the universe’s eternity 
was divided into a series of “great years" in which the same events keep on recurring, just like winter and 
summer keep on recurring every “small year." If.some time periods were sometimes personified as divini¬ 
ties or as divinities’ organs, this was yet another expression of the idea of the cycle as an organic unity. 

2. "The durations of traditional time may be compared to numbers that in turn are regarded as the enumera¬ 
tion of lower unities or as sums capable of serving as units for the composition of higher numbers. Conti¬ 
nuity is given to them by the mental operation that synthesizes their elements." Ibid.. 202. 

3. This idea is reflected in the Hindu view according to which a year on the earth corresponds to a day for some 
lesser gods; while a yearofthe.se gods’ lives corresponds to a day for gods occupying a higher hierarchical 
level, until we reach the days and nights of Brahman, which express the cyclical unfolding of die cosmic 

manifestation. See The Laws of Manu 1.64—74. In the same text it is written that these cycles are repeated 

by the Supreme Lord “as if he were playing”; this expresses the irrelevance and the antihistoricity of the 
repetition in comparison to the immutable and eternal element that is manifested in it. Wc may also recall 
the biblical saying: “For a thousand years in your sight are as yesterday, now that it is past....” Ps. 90:4. 


divided into several cyclical periods reflecting such a structure, and by associating to 
specific moments of these cycles the celebrations, rituals, or festivities that were 
destined to reawaken or to reveal the corresponding meanings, the traditional world 
actively promoted a liberation and a transfiguration; it arrested the confused flow of 
the “waters” and created in them a transparency in the current of becoming, thus 
revealing immobile metaphysical depths. Therefore, it should not come as a surprise 
that the base calendar that measured time in ancient times had a sacred character 
and that it was entrusted to the wisdom of the priestly castes and that the hours of the 
day, the days of the week, and given days of the year were considered sacred to 
certain deities or associated with specific destinies. After all, as a residue of this 
notion, Catholicism developed a liturgical year spangled with religious festivities 
and with days marked by sacred events; in this liturgical year we can still find an 
echo of that ancient view of time that was measured by ritual, transfigured by the 
symbol, and shaped into the image of a “sacred history.” 

The fact that stars, stellar periods, and given points in the course of the sun were 
traditionally utilized to determine the units of rhythm hardly lends support to the so- 
called naturalistic interpretations of time; in fact, the traditional world never “dei¬ 
fied” the natural or heavenly elements, but on the contrary, these elements were 
thought fit to convey divine forces in an analogical fashion: “There is in the heavens 
a great multitude of gods who have been recognized as such by those who survey the 
heavens not casually, nor like cattle.”' 1 Therefore, we can assume that the position of 
the sun in the course of the year was primordially the center and the beginning of an 
organic system (of which the calendar notation was just another aspect) that estab¬ 
lished constant interferences ancl symbolical and magical correspondences between 
man, cosmos, and supernatural reality; 5 The two arches of the ascent and the descent 
of the solar light during the year appear to be the most apt to express the sacrificial 
meaning of death and rebirth, as well as the cycle constituted by the dark descending 
path and by the bright ascending path. 

I will discuss later the tradition according to which the area that today corresponds 
to the Arctic regions was the original homeland of the stocks that created the main Indo- 
European civilizations. It is possible that when the Arctic freeze occurred, the division 
of the year into one long night and one long day highly dramatized the perception of 
the sun’s journey in the sky, and thus made it one of the best ways to express the 
abovementioned metaphysical meanings, substituting them with what was referred 

4. Emperor Julian, Hymn to King Helios , 148c. 

5. From a traditional point of view, great reservations should be expressed about the theory of H. Wirth 
concerning a sacred series derived in primordial times from the astral movement of the sun as "god-year"; 
this series, according to Wirth, was the basis for the measurement of time, for the signs and for the roots ot 
a common prehistoric language and also for meanings related to the cult. 


144 


145 



The World of Traditioh 


Space, Tktie, the Earth 


to in more remote periods as a pure, though not yet solar, “polar” symbolism. 

Considering that the constellations of the zodiac, which were articulations of the 
“god-year,” were used to identify the “moments” of the sun’s position in the sky, the 
number twelve is repeatedly found as one of the most apt “rhythms” to express any¬ 
thing that may have the meaning of a “solar” fulfillment. This number is also found 
wherever a center was established that in one way or another embodied or attempted 
to embody the Uranian-solar tradition, or wherever myths or legends have portrayed 
the type of an analogous regency through figurations or symbolica l personifications. 6 
But in the course of the solar journey along the twelve points of the zodiac, one point 
in particular acquires a special meaning, and that is the critical one corresponding to 
the lowest point on the ellipsis (winter solstice), which marks the end of the descent, 
the beginning of the reascent, and the separation of the dark and the bright periods. 
According to figurations formulated in remote prehistory, the “god-year” is portrayed 
in this context as the “axe” or as the “god-axe” who splits in half the circular symbol 
of the year (or other equivalent symbols): from a spiritual perspective this marks the 
typically “triumphant” moment of solarity and the beginning of a “new life” and of a 
new cycle (natalls dii solis invicti). This moment was represented in various myths 
as the victorious outcome of the struggle of a solar hero against creatures mani¬ 
festing the dark principle; these creatures were often represented by the sign of the 

6. The number twelve, characterizing the signs of (he zodiac, which correspond to the Hindu Xdityu, appears 
in the number of chapters of The Law* of Manu; in the twelve great Namshan of the circular council of the 
Dalai Lama; in the twelve disciples of Lao-tzu (originally two, who in turn initiated another ten); in 
the number of the priests of several Roman collegia {such as the Arvali and the Salii); in the number of the 
ancilia established by Niima in return for the sign of the heavenly protection he received (twelve is also 
the number of vultures that gave to Romulus rather than Remus the right to give his name to the city; 
twelve were also the lictorians instituted by Romulus), and in the altars dedicated to Janus; in the twelve 
disciples of Christ and in the twelve gates of the heavenly Jerusalem; in the twelve great Hellenic and 
Roman deities; in the twelve judges of the Egyptian Book of the Dead: in the twelve jasper towers built on 
the Taoist sacred mountain named Kuen-Lun; in the twelve main Aesir and their corresponding dwellings 
or thrones in the Nordic tradition; in the twelve labors of Heracles; in the number of days of Siegfried's 
journey and in twelve kings subjected to him; in (he twelve main knights sitting at King Arthur's Round 
Tabic; and in the twelve palatines of Charlemagne. The list could go on and on. 

Traditionally the number seven refers to rhythms of development, of formation and of fulfillment in 
man, the cosmos, and the spirit. As far as the spiritual dimension is concerned, see the seven trials found 
in many initiations; the seven deeds of Rostan; the seven days Buddha spent under the "bodhi tree”; the 
seven cycles of seven days each necessary to learn the doctrine, according to some Buddhist traditions. 
While the days of biblical "creation” were believed to be seven, these “days” corresponded to the millen¬ 
nia of the Iranian-Chaldean traditions; these millenia were cycles, the last of which was considered a 
cycle of “consummation,” that is, of fulfillment and resolution or destruction in a solar sense. See R. 
Gudnon, Le Symbolisme de la croJx. Thus the week corresponds to the great hebdomadary of the ages of 
the world, just as the solar year corresponds to the cosmic “great year." There are also many references to 
the development and duration of some civilizations, such as the six xuecu/a of life attributed to the Roman 
world, the seventh being the saeculum of its demise; the number of the first kings of Rome; the ages of the 
first Manus of the present cycle according to the Hindu tradition, and so on. 


zodiac in which the winter solstice happened to fall in that particular year. 

The dates corresponding to stellar positions in the sky (such as the solstice), 
which were apt to express higher meanings in terms of a cosmic symbolism, are 
preserved almost identically in the various forms assumed by Tradition and passed 
on from one people to another. Through a comparative study it is possible and very 
easy to point out tbe correspondence and the uniformity of feasts and of fundamental 
calendar rhythms through which the Sacred was introduced into the fabric of time, 
thus breaking its duration into many cyclical images of an eternal history that various 
natural phenomena contributed to recall and to mark the rhythm. 

In the traditional view, moreover, time presented a magical aspect. Since by 
virtue of the law of analogical correspondences every point of a cycle had its own 
individuality, duration consisted in the periodical succession of manifestations typi¬ 
cal of certain influences and powers: it presented times that were favorable and 
unfavorable, auspicious and inauspicious. This qualitative element of time played 
the main role in the science of the rite; the parts of time could not be considered 
indifferent to the things to be performed and thus presented an active character that 
had to be reckoned with. 7 Every rite had its own appointed “time”; it had to be per¬ 
formed at a particular moment, outside of which its virtue was diminished or para¬ 
lyzed, and could even produce the opposite effect. In many ways we can agree with 
Hubert-Mauss, who said that the ancient calendar marked the periodicity of a sys¬ 
tem of rites. More generally, there were disciplines (such as the science of divina¬ 
tion) that attempted to establish whether a given time or period was auspicious or not 
for the performance of a given deed; I have already mentioned the attention given to 
this matter in Roman military enterprises. 

This is not “fatalism”; it rather expresses traditional man’s constant intent to pro¬ 
long and to integrate his own strength with a nonhuman strength by discovering the 
times in which two rhythms (the human rhythm and the rhythm of natural powers), by 
virtue of a law of syntony—of a concordant action and of a certain correspondence 
between the physical and the metaphysical dimensions—are liable to become one 
thing, and thus cause invisible powers to act. In this way the qualitative view of time is 
confirmed. Within time every hour and every aspect has it sacred aspect and its “vir¬ 
tue”; also, acting within time on the higher, symbolical, and sacral plane 8 there are cy¬ 
clical laws that actualize in an identical fashion an “uninterrupted chain of eternity.” 

7. Concerning this future, see the characteristic expressions of Macrobius, Saturnalia, 1.1 T 

8, Such a plane should not be confused with the magical plane, although the latter, in the last analysis, 
presupposes an order of knowledge deriving more or less directly from the former. A separate group 
consists of those rites and those celebrations, which despite their cyclical character, do not find real corre¬ 
spondences in nature but are rather originated by fatal events connected to a given race. 


146 


147 



The World of Tradition 


Space, Tiffie, the Earth 


The considerations that follow from these premises are very important. If tradi¬ 
tionally, empirical time was measured by a transcendent time that did not contain 
events but meanings; and if this essentially melahistorical time must lie considered 
as the context in which myths, heroes, and traditional gods lived and “acted”—then 
an opposite shift acting “from below” must also be conceived. In other words, it is pos¬ 
sible that some historically real events or people may have repeated and dramatized 
a myth, incarnating metahistorical structures and symbols whether in part or entirely, 
whether consciously or unconsciously. Thereupon, by virtue of this, these events or 
beings shift from one time to the other, becoming new expressions of preexisting re¬ 
alities. They belong to both times; they are characters and events that are simulta¬ 
neously real and symbolical, and on this basis they can be transported from one pe¬ 
riod to another, before or after their real existence, as long as one is aware of the 
metahistorical element they represent. This is the reason why some of the findings of 
modem scholars concerning the alleged historicity of events or characters of the tra¬ 
ditional world, much of their obsession to separate what is historical from what is mythi¬ 
cal or legendary, some of their doubts about the “childish” traditional chronology, and 
finally their belief in so-called euhemerism, can most decisively be said to lack solid 
foundations. In these cases—as I have previously argued—myth and antihistory rep¬ 
resent the path leading to a deeper knowledge of what we regard as “history.” 

Moreover, it is in this same order of ideas that we must look for the true meanino 
of the legends concerning characters who became “invisible,” who “never died/' 
and who are destined to “reawaken" or to manifest themselves at the end of a given 
time (cyclical couespondence) such as Alexander the Great, King Arthur, “Frederick," 
King Sebastian. The latter are all different incarnations of the same one theme trans¬ 
ferred from reality into superreality. The Hindu doctrine of the avatars, the periodi¬ 
ca] divine incarnations who assume different personalities but who nevertheless ex¬ 
press the same function, must be interpreted along these tines. 

If traditional man had an experience of time essentially different from that of 
modern man, it follows that analogous considerations must be made concerning the 
experience of space. Space is considered today as the simple “container" of bodies 
and of motions, totally indifferent to both. It is homogeneous: a particular area of it is 
the objective equivalent of another one, and the fact that a thing is found—or that an 
event may take place—in one point of space rather than in another, does not confer 
any particular quality to the intimate nature of that thing or of that event. I am refer¬ 
ring here to what space represents in the immediate experience of modern man and 
not to ceitain lecent physical-mathematical views oi space as a curved and non- 
homogeneous, multidimensional space. Moreover, beside the fact that these are mere 
mathematical schemata (the value of which is merely pragmatic and without corre¬ 


spondence to any real experience), the different values that the points of each of 
these spaces represent when considered as “intensive fields" are referred only to 
matter, energy, and gravitation, and not to something extraphysical or qualitative. 

In the experience of traditional man, on the contrary, and even in its residues (at 
times present among some savage populations), space is alive and saturated with all 
kinds of qualities and intensity. The traditional idea of space is often confused with 
the same idea of “vital ether" (the akasa or mana), which is a mystical, all-pervasive 
substance-energy, more material than immaterial, more psychic than physical, often 
conceived as “light," and distributed according to various saturations in various regions; 
thus, each of these regions seems to possess its own virtues and to participate essen¬ 
tially in the powers that reside in it so as to make every place a fatidic space endowed 
with its own intensity and occult individuality. In the well-known expression of 
Epimenides of Knossos (sixth century b.c.) that was quoted by Paul in his speech in 
the Areopagus: “In him we live and move and have our being" (Acts 17:28), if we sub¬ 
stitute for the word “him” the word “divine" or “sacred” or “numinous," it may be 
employed to express what traditional man often saw instead of the space of the modems, 
which is ultimately an abstract and impersonal “place" rilled with objects and motions. 

It is not possible in this context to discuss all of what in the traditional world was 
based on such an experience of space. I will limit myself to references in the two 
distinct orders mentioned above, namely, the magical and the symbolical. 

Space in antiquity has constantly provided the basis for the most characteristic 
expressions of the metaphysical dimension. The heavenly and the earthly regions, high 
and low, the vertical and horizontal axis, left and right, were all categories that pro¬ 
vided the material for a typical, highly significant, and universal symbolism, one of 
the most famous forms of which was the symbolism of the cross. There may well have 
been a relationship between the two-dimensional cross and the four cardinal points; 
between the three-dimensional cross and the schema derived by adding to these points 
the dimensions of “above" and “below." Still this does not lend any support whatso¬ 
ever to the naturalistic and geo-astronomical interpretations of ancient symbols. At 
this point it is helpful to repeat what has been said concerning the astral element of 
the calendars, namely, that when the cross is found in nature this means that “true 
symbolism, far from being artificially devised by man, is found in nature itself; or 
better, nature in its entirety is nothing but a symbol of transcendent realities." 9 

When we shift to the magical plane, every direction in space corresponded to 
given “influences" that were often portrayed as supernatural beings or as spirits; this 
knowledge not only helped to establish important aspects of the augural science and 

9. R. Gufenon, Le Symbolisme de hi croix . Also J. Evola, The Hermetic Tradition. 


148 


149 



The World of Tradition 


Space, Titae, the Earth 


of geomancy (see the characteristic development of this discipline in the Far East), 
but also the doctrine of the sacred orientations in the rite and the arrangement of die 
temples (the art of orientation of the cathedrals was preserved in Europe up to the 
Middle Ages), always in conformity with the law of analogies and with the possibil¬ 
ity, afforded by this law, to extend the human and the visible element into the cosmic 
and invisible dimension. Just as one moment of traditional time did not correspond to 
another because of the action (especially a ritual one) that had to be undertaken, 
likewise there was not a point, a region, or a place of traditional space that corre¬ 
sponded to another. Tills was the case in an even wider sense owing to the fact that 
some rites required subterranean places or caves, while others required mountain 
peaks, and so on. In fact there was such a tiling as a real (that is, not arbitrary, but 
conformed to physical transpositions of metaphysical elements) sacred geography 
that inspired the belief in “sacred” lands and cities, in the traditional centers of spiri¬ 
tual influence on earth, and also in environments consecrated so as to “vitalize” any 
action oriented to the Transcendence taking place within them. Generally speaking, 
in the world of Tradition the location of the temples and of many cities was not 
casual, nor did it obey simple criteria of convenience; their construction was pre¬ 
ceded by specific rites and obeyed special laws of rhythm and of analogy. It is very 
easy to identify those elements that indicate that the space in which the traditional 
rite took place was not space as modem man understands it but rather a living, fatidic, 
magnetic space in which every gesture had a meaning and in which every sign, 
word, and action participated in a sense of ineluctability and of eternity, thus becom¬ 
ing transformed into a kind of decree of the Invisible. And yet the space in which the 
rite occurs should be regarded as a more intense kind of space in the general percep¬ 
tion of the man of Tradition. 

I will now briefly discuss the “myths” with which, according to our contemporar¬ 
ies, ancient man embellished the various elements and aspects of nature. The truth is 
that here we find once more that opposition between hyperrealism and humanism 
that separates what is traditional from what is modem. 

The experience of nature, ’ as it is understood by modem man, namely, as a 
lyrical, subjectivist pathos awoken in the sentiments of the individual at the sight of 
natiu e, was a lmost entirely absent in traditional man. Before the high and snowy peaks, 
the silence of the woods, the flowing of the rivers, mysterious caves, and so on, tradi¬ 
tional man did not have poetic and subjective impressions typical of a romantic soul, 
but rather real sensations—even though at times confused—of the supernatural, of 
the powers (numina) that permeated those places; these sensations were translated 
into various images (spirits and gods of the elements, waterfalls, woods, and so on) 
often determined by the imagination, yet not arbitrarily and subjectively, but accord¬ 


ing to a necessary process. In other words, we may assume that in traditional man the 
power of the imagination was not merely confined to either the material images cor¬ 
responding to sensible data or arbitrary and subjective images, as in the case of the 
reveries or dreams of modem man. On the contrary, we may conclude that in tradi¬ 
tional man the power of the imagination was free, to a high degree, from the yoke of 
the physical senses, as it is nowadays in the state of sleep or through the use of drugs; 
this power was so disposed as to be able to perceive and translate into plastic forms 
subtler impressions of the environment, which nonetheless were not arbitrary and 
subjective. When in the state of dream a physical impression, such as the pressure of 
the blankets, is dramatized with the image of a falling rock, this is obviously the case 
of a fantastic and yet not arbitrary production: the image arose out of necessity, inde¬ 
pendently from the I, as a symbol that effectively corresponds to a perception. The 
same holds true for those fantastic images primordial man introduced in nature. Pri¬ 
mordial man, in addition to physical perception, also had a “psychic” or subtle per¬ 
ception of things and places (coiTesponding to the “presences” found in them) that was 
generated by a power of the imagination free from the physical senses and respon¬ 
sible for determining in it corresponding symbolical dramatizations: for example, gods, 
demons, elementals, and spirits ruling over places and phenomena. It is true that there 
have often been different personifications according to the multiform power of the 
imagination of various races and sometimes even of different people; but a trained 
eye is able to see a unity behind this variety, just as a person who is awake is imme¬ 
diately able to see unity in the variety of impressions created by the diversity of sym¬ 
bols in the dreams of different people. These images are nevertheless equivalent once 
they are reduced to their common objective cause and perceived in a distinct way. 

Far from being fantastic poetical tales drawn from nature, or better, from those 
material representations of nature that modem man can perceive, the myths of the 
ancients and their fantastic fundamental figurations originally represented an inte¬ 
gration of the objective experience of nature. The myths also represented something 
that spontaneously penetrated into the fabric of sensible data, thus completing them 
with lively and at times even visible symbols of the subtle, “demonic,” or sacred 
element of space and time. 

These considerations concerning the traditional myths and the special relation they 
have with the sense of nature must naturally be applied to every traditional myth. It 
must be acknowledged that every traditional mythology arises as a necessary process 
in the individual consciousness, the origin of which resides in real, though unconscious 
and obscure, relationships with a higher reality; these relationships are then drama¬ 
tized in various ways by the power of the imagination. Therefore, not only naturalis¬ 
tic or “theological” myths but historical ones as well should not be regarded as arbi- 



The World of Tradition 


Space, Time, the Earth 


trary inventions totally devoid of an objective value with regard to facts or people, but 
rather as integrations that did not occur casually. These integrations eventually re¬ 
vealed the superhistorical content that may be found to varying degrees in those his¬ 
torical individuals and events. Therefore, the eventual lack of correspondence of the 
historical element with a myth demonstrates the untruth of history rather than that of 
the myth; this thought occurred to Hegel too, when he spoke about the “impotence 
[Ohnmacht] of nature.” 

What has been said so far relates to the presence of some kind of existential 
situation concerning the basic relationship between the I and the not-I. This relation¬ 
ship has lately been characterized by a set and rigid separation. It so appears that in 
the origins, the borders between I and not-I were potentially fluid and unstable, and 
in certain cases they could partially be removed. When that happened, either one of 
two possibilities could occur; the possibility of incursions of the not-I (of “nature” in 
the sense of its elemental forces and its psychism) into the I, or an incursion of the I 
into the not-I. The first possibility explains what have been called the perils of the 
soul . It is the idea that the unity and the autonomy of the person may be threatened 
and affected by processes of possession and of obession; hence the existence of 
rituals and various institutions that have as their goal the spiritual defense of the 
individual or of the collectivity and the confirmation of the independence and the 
sovereignty of the I and of its structures. 10 

The general presupposition for the efficacy of a body of magical procedures 
was that the second possibility, which consists of the removal of the boundaries and 
of the ensuing incursions in the opposite direction (of the I into the not-I), could take 
place. Since the two possibilities shared the same basis, the advantages of the latter 
had as a counterpart die existential risks derived from the former. 

We should remember that during the last times, following the progressive ma¬ 
terialization of the I, both possibilities have disappeared. The active and positive 
(magic) possibility has disappeared everywhere but in few insignificant and mar¬ 
ginal residues. As far as the “perils of the soul” are concerned, modem man, who 
boasts to have finally become free and enlightened, and who laughs at everything 
that in traditional antiquity derived from that different relationship between I and 
not-I, is really deceiving himself to think he is safe from them. Those dangers have 
only assumed a different form, which disguises them; modern man is open to the 
complexes of the collective unconscious,” to emotive and irrational currents, to 
collective influences and to ideologies with consequences far more harmful and 
deploiable than those found in other eras and deriving from different influences. 

10. Tins should refer mainly lo civilizations of a higher kind. When talking about the earth, I will mention the 
existence of an opposite orientation in the primitive connections between man and earth. 


Returning to what I have expounded before, I would like to say something about 
the ancient meaning of the earth and of its properties. 

From a traditional point of view, between man and his land, between blood and 
soil, there existed an intimate relationship of a living and psychic character. Since a 
given area had a psychic individuality in addition to its geographic individuality, 
those who were bom in it were bound to be deeply affected by it. From a doctrinal 
point of view we must distinguish a double aspect in this state of dependency, the 
former naturalistic, the latter supernaturalistic, which leads us back to the 
abovementioned distinction between “totemism” and the tradition of a patrician blood 
that has been purified by an element from above. 

The former aspect concerns beings who do not go beyond empirical and ordi¬ 
nary life. In these beings the collective predominates, both as a law of blood and 
stock and as law of the soil. Even if the mystical sense of the region to which they 
belong is awakened, such a sense does not go beyond mere “tellurism”; though they 
may know a tradition of rites, these rites have only a demonic and totemic character 
and they contribute to strengthening and renewing rather than overcoming and re¬ 
moving, the law by virtue of which the individual does not have a life of his own and 
is thus destined to be dissolved into the subpersonal stock of his blood. Such a stage 
may be characterized by an almost communist, and at times even matriarchies 1 so¬ 
cial organization of the clan or of the tribe. What we find in it, however, is what in 
modern man has either become extinguished or has become nationalistic or roman¬ 
tic rhetoric, namely, the organic and living sense of one’s own land, which is a direct 
derivation of the qualitative experience of space in general. 

The second aspect of the traditional relationship between a man and his land is 
very different. Here we find the idea of a supernatural action that has permeated a 
given territory with a supernatural influence by removing the demonic telluric ele¬ 
ment of the soil and by imposing upon it a “triumphal” seal, thus reducing it to a mere 
substratum for the powers that transcend it. We have already found this idea in the 
ancient Iranian belief that the “glory,” the celestial, living, and “triumphal” fire that 
is the exclusive legacy of kings, pervades the lands that the Aryan race has con¬ 
quered and that it possesses and defends against the “infidels” and the forces work¬ 
ing for the god of darkness. After all, even in more recent times, there has been an 
intimate and not merely empirical relationship between spear and plough, between 
nobility and the farmers. It is significant that Aryan deities such as Mars or Donar- 
Thor were simultaneously deities of war and of victory (over “elemental natures” in 
the case of Thor) and of the soil, presiding over its cultivation. I have already men¬ 
tioned the symbolical and even initiatory transpositions that surrounded the “cultiva¬ 
tor” and the memory of it that remains in the derivation of the word “culture.” 

Another characteristic expression lies in the fact that in every higher form of 


152 


153 



The World of Trhditioh 


Splice, Tie, the Earth 


tradition, private ownership of the land as private property was an aristocratic and 
sacred privilege; the only people who could lay claim to the land were those who had 
rites in the specific patrician sense I mentioned in chapter 6, namely, those who are 
the living bearers of a divine element (in Rome this right belonged only to the patres, 
the lords of the sacrificial fire; in Egypt it belonged only to the warriors and the 
priests), The slaves, those without family names and tradition, were not thought to be 
qualified to own land because of their social status. For instance, in the ancient Nahua- 
Aztec civilization, two distinct and even opposite types of property coexisted. One 
was an aristocratic, hereditary, and differentiated type, that was transmitted together 
with one’s family’s social status; the second was popular and plebeian, of a promis¬ 
cuous type, like the Russian mir. This opposition can be found in several other civi¬ 
lizations and is related to that which existed between the Uranian and the chthonic 
cults. In traditional nobility a mysterious relationship was established between the 
gods or the heroes of a particular gens and that very land; it was through its numina 
and with a net accentuation of the meaning (originally not only material) of owner¬ 
ship and lordship that the gens was connected to its own land, so much so that, due to 
a symbolical and possibly magical transposition, its limits (the Greek ep/cogand the 
Roman he return) were regarded as sacred, fatal, and protected by gods of order such 
as Zeus and Jupiter; these are almost the equivalent, on another plane, of the same 
inner limits of the noble caste and of the noble family. We can say that at this level 
the limits of the land, just like the spiritual limits of the castes, were not limits that 
enslaved but that preserved and freed. Thus, we can understand why exile was often 
regarded as a punishment of a seriousness hardly understood today; it was almost 
like dying to the gens to whom one belonged. 

The same order of ideas is confirmed in the fact that in several traditional civi¬ 
lizations, to settle in a new, unknown, or wild land and to take possession of it was 
regarded as an act of creation and as an image of the primordial act whereby chaos 
was transformed into cosmos; in other words, it was not regarded as a mere human 
deed, but rather as an almost magical and ritual action believed to bestow on a land 
and on a physical location a “form” by bathing such land in the sacred and by making 
it living and real in a higher sense. Thus, there are examples of the ritual of taking 
possession of lands and of territorial conquests, as in the case of the landnama in 
ancient Iceland or in the Aryan celebration of a territory through the establishment in 
it of an altar with fire. 11 

In China the assignment of a fief, which turned a patrician into a prince, implied, 

1 1. M. Eliadc, Manuel d'histoire des religions (Paris 1949), 345; see The Myth of (he Eternal Return (Princeton, 
1954). Eliade correctly remarked that at the time of the expansion of the Christian eeumene, to raise or 
plant a cross (today this is done with a flag) in every new country added to this eeumene. 


among other things, the duty to maintain a sacrificial ritual for one’s divine ancestors 
(who thus became the protectors of the territory) and for the god of this piece of land, 
who was “created” for the benefit of the prince himself. Moreover, if in the ancient 
Aryan law the firstborn was entitled to inherit the father’s property and lands—often 
with the bond of inalienability—the property belonged to him essentially because he 
was regarded as the one who perpetuated the ritual of the family as the pontifex and 
the fiaaiXevq of his own people, and as the one whose responsibility it was to tend 
the sacred fire and not let it be put out, since the fire was considered the body or life 
of the divine ancestor. We must also consider that the legacy of the rite and that of 
the earth formed one whole, filled with meaning. The ode/, the nnindlum of free 
Northem-Aryan men, in which the ideas of possession of the land, nobility, warrior 
blood, and divine cult were aspects of an unbreakable synthesis, was an example of 
this. In inheriting the ancestral land, there existed an unspoken and express commit¬ 
ment toward it, almost as a counterpart of the duty toward the divine and aristocratic 
legacy that was passed on through the blood and that alone had originally introduced 
the right to property. The last traces of these values can be found in the feudal Middle 
Ages. 

Even though during this time the right to property no longer belonged to the 
type of the aristocrat of sacred origins who was surrounded only by equals or by 
inferiors, as in the traditional forms of the origins found in the oldest constitution of 
the German people, and even though an aristocratic warrior class came to own the 
right to the land, nevertheless, the counterpart of such a right was the capability of a 
superindividual, though not sacred, dedication. The assignment of a fief implied, 
from the Franks on, the commitment on the part of the feudal lord to be faithful to his 
prince, that is, to exercise that tides that had a heroic and religious as well as a 
political and military value (snemmentum fldelitatis). This rides’represented readi¬ 
ness to die and to sacrifice (i.e., a connection to a superior order) in a mediated way 
rather than immediately (as in the case of sacred aristocracy), sometimes without a 
metaphysical insight, although always with the virile superiority over the naturalistic 
and individualistic element and with a well-developed ethics of honor. Thus, those 
who are prone to consider not only the contingent and historical element, but also the 
meaning that social institutions assume on a higher plane, may detect in the feudal 
regimes of the Middle Ages traces of the traditional idea of the aristocratic and 
sacred privilege of ownership of the land, the idea according to which to own and be 
lord of a land (the inalienable right of superior stocks) is a spiritual and not merely a 
political title and commitment. Even the feudal interdependence between the state 
of the people and the state of the lands had a special meaning. Originally the state of 
the people determined the state of the territorial property; depending on whether a 
man was more or less free, more or less powerful, the land he inhabited assumed 


154 


155 


The World of taion 

either this or that character, which was validated by various titles of nobility. The 
state of tine lands reflected therefore the state of the people. On this basis, the depen¬ 
dency that arose between the ideas of ownership and land became so intimate that 
later on the sign often appeared as a cause and the state of a people not only was 
indicated but determined by that of the lands; moreover, the social status and the 
various hierarchical and aristocratic dignities were incorporated in the soil. 12 

Thus I agree wholeheartedly with the idea expressed by Coulanges according 
to which the apparition of the “will,” in the sense of an individualistic freedom, of 
those who own the land to divide their property, break it up, and separate it from the 
legacy of blood and the rigorous norms of the paternal right and primogeniture, truly 
represents one of the characteristic manifestations of the degeneration of the tradi¬ 
tional spirit. More generally, when the right of property ceases to be the privilege of 
the two higher castes and shifts to the two lower castes (the merchants and the seifs), 
what de facto occurs is a virtual naturalistic regression, and therefore man’s depen¬ 
dency on the “spirits of the land” is reestablished; in the case of the solar traditional¬ 
ism of the lords of the soil, superior “presences” transformed these “spirits” into 
zones of favorable influences and into “creative” and preserving limits. The land, 
which may also belong to a merchant (the owners of the capitalist, bourgeois age 
may be regarded as the modern equivalent of the ancient merchant caste) or to a serf 
(our modem worker), is a desecrated land; in conformity with the interests typical of 
the two inferior castes, which have succeeded in taking the land away from the 
ancient type of “feudal lords,” the land is only valued from an economic point of 
view and it is exploited as much as possible with machines and with other modem 
technical devices. That being the case, it is natural to encounter other typical traits of 
a degeneration such as the property increasingly shifts from the individual to the 
collectivity. Parallel with the collapse of tire aristocratic title to the lands and the 
economy having become die main factor, what emerges first is nationalism, which is 
followed by socialism and finally by Marxist communism. In other words, there is a 
return to the rule of the collective over the individual that reaffirms the collectivist 
and promiscuous concept of property typical of inferior races as an “overcoming” of 
private property and as nationalization, socialization, and proletarization of goods 
and of lands. 


! 2. M. Guizot, Esau it stir I’histoire de France (Paris, 1868). 


156 


20 



Man and Woman 


T o complete these considerations on traditional life, I will now briefly discuss 
the sexual dimension. 

In this context too we find that in the traditional worldview, realities corresponded 
to symbols and actions to rites; what derives from these correspondences are the 
principles for understanding the sexes and for regulating the relationships that are 
necessarily established between men and women in every normal civilization. 

In traditional symbolism, the supernatural principle was conceived as “mascu¬ 
line” and the principle of nature and of becoming as “feminine.” In Hellenic terms 
the “one” {To £v), which is “in itself,” complete, and self-sufficient, is regarded as 
masculine. Conversely, the dyad, the principle of differentiation and of “other-than- 
self,” and thus the principle of desire and of movement, is regarded as feminine. In 
Hindu terms (according to the Samkhya dartena), the impassible spirit (purusa) is 
masculine, while prakfti, the active matrix of every conditioned fonn, is feminine. 
The Far Eastern tradition has expressed equivalent concepts through the cosmic du¬ 
ality of yin and yang, whereby yang, the male principle, is associated with the “vir¬ 
tue of heaven” and yin, the feminine principle, with the principle of the “earth.” 1 

Considered in and of themselves, the two principles are in opposition to each 
other. But in the order of the creative formation that I have repeatedly identified as 
the soul of the traditional world, and that was destined to develop historically in 
relation to the conflict between various races and civilizations, they are transformed 
into elements of a synthesis in which both retain a distinctive function. This is not the 
place to show that behind the various representations of the myth of the “fall” we 
often find the idea of the male principle’s identification with and loss in the feminine 
principle until the former has acquired the latter’s way of being. In any event, when 

1. Further metaphysical and mythical references are found in J. Evola, Eros mid the Mysteries of Love: 
among the philosophers of the Sung dynasty we find the teaching that Heaven “produces" men while, the 
Earth “produces” women; therefore woman must be subjected to man as the Earth is subjected to Heaven. 


157 



The World of taion 


this happens, when that which is naturally a self-subsistent principle succumbs to the 
law of that which does not have its own principle in itself by giving in to the forces of 
“desire,” then it is appropriate to talk about a “fall.” On the plane of human reality, 
the diffidence that various traditions have nurtured toward women is based precisely 
on this belief; the woman is often considered as a principle of “sin,” impurity, and 
evil, as well as a temptation and a danger for those who are in search of the super¬ 
natural. 

Nevertheless, it is possible to consider another possibility that runs counter to 
the direction of the “fall,” and that is to establish the correct relationship between the 
two principles. This occurs when the feminine principle, whose force is centrifugal, 
does not turn to fleeting objects but rather to a “virile” stability in which she finds a 
limit to her “restlessness.” Stability is then transmitted to the feminine principle to 
the point of intimately transfiguring all of its possibilities. What occurs in these terms 
is a synthesis in a positive sense. What is needed therefore is a radical “conversion” 
of the feminine principle to the opposite principle; moreover, it is absolutely neces¬ 
sary for the masculine principle to remain wholly itself. Then, according to meta¬ 
physical symbols, the female becomes the “bride” and also the “power” or instru¬ 
mental generating force that receives the primordial principle of the immobile male 5 s 
activity and form: as in the doctrine of Sakti, which can also be found in Aristotelianism 
and in Neoplatonism, though expressed in different terms, I have mentioned the 
Tantric-Tibetan representations that are very significant in this regard, in which the 
male “bearer-of-the-scepter” is immobile, cold, and substantiated with light while 
the substance of Sakti, which envelops it and uses it as its axis, is a flickering flame. 2 

These meanings constitute the foundation of the traditional teachings concern¬ 
ing the human sexes. This norm obeys the principle of the caste system and it also 
emphasizes the two cardinal tenets of dharma and of bhakti, or fides: self-subsistent 
nature and active dedication. 

If biith is not a matter of chance, then it is not a coincidence for a being to 
“awaken” to itself in the body of a man or a woman. Here too, the physical differ¬ 
ence should be viewed as the equivalent of a spiritual difference; hence a being is a 
man or a woman in a physical way only because a being is either masculine or 
feminine in a transcendental way; sexual differentiation, far from being an irrel¬ 
evant factor in relation to the spirit, is the sign that points to a particular vocation and 
to a distinctive dhaima . 

2. In the erotic symbolism of these traditions the same meaning is expressed through the figuration of the 
divine couple as they engage in the so-called vipaffin-maithuna, an intercourse in which the male is still 
while the sukti moves her body. 


We know that every traditional civilization is based on the will to order and give 
“form,” and that the traditional law is not oriented toward what is unqualified, equal, 
and indefinite, or in other words, toward that impersonal mix in which the various 
parts of the whole become promiscuously or atomically similar, but radier intends 
these parts to be themselves and to express as perfectly as possible their own typical 
nature. Therefore, particularly with regard to the genders, man and woman are two 
different types; those who are bom as men must realize themselves as men, while 
those who are bom as women must realize themselves as women, overcoming any 
mixture and promiscuity of vocations. Even in regard to the supernatural vocation, 
man and woman must both have their own distinctive paths to follow, which cannot 
be altered without them turning into contradictory and inorganic ways of being. 

I have already considered the way of being that corresponds eminently to man; 

I have also discussed the two main paths of approach to the value of “being a 
principle to oneself,” namely, action and contemplation. Thus, the warrior (the hero) 
and the ascetic represent the two fundamental types of pure virility. In symmetry 
with these types, there are also two types available to the feminine nature. A woman 
realizes herself as such and even rises to the same level reached by a man as warrior 
and ascetic only as lover and mother. These are bipartitions of the same ideal strain; 
just as there is an active heroism, there is also a passive heroism; there is a heroism 
of absolute affinnation and a heroism of absolute dedication. They can both bi 
luminous and produce plenty of fruits, as far as overcoming human limitations am 
achieving liberation are concerned, when they are lived with purity and in the sense 
of an offering. This differentiation of the heroic strain determines the distinctive 
character of the paths of fulfillment available to men and women. In the case of 
women the actions of the warrior and of the ascetic who affirm themselves in a Life 
that is beyond life, the former through pure action and the latter through pure detach¬ 
ment, correspond to the act of the woman totally giving of herself and being entirely 
for another being, whether he is the loved one (the ty pe of the lover—the Aphrodistic 
woman) or the son (the type of the mother—the Demetrian woman), finding in this 
dedication the meaning of her own life, her own joy, and her own justification. This 
is what bhakti or fides, which constitute the normal and natural way of participation 
of the traditional woman, really mean, both in the order of “form” and even beyond 
“form” when it is lived in a radical and impersonal way. To realize oneself in an 
increasingly resolute way according to these two distinct and unmistakable direc¬ 
tions; to reduce in a woman all that is masculine and in a man everything that is 
feminine; and to strive to implement the archetypes of the “absolute man” and of the 
“absolute woman”—this was the traditional law concerning the sexes according to 
their different planes of existence. 


158 


159 



The World of Traditioh 


Therefore, a woman could traditionally participate in the sacred hierarchical 
order only in a mediated fashion, through her relationship with a man. In India women 
did not have their own initiation even when they belonged to a higher caste: before 
they got married they did not belong to the sacred community of the noble ones 
(arya) other than through their fathers, and when they were married, through their 
husbands, who also represented the mystical head of the family. 3 In Doric Hellas, the 
woman in her entire life did not enjoy any rights; before getting married, her KVpiog 
was her father* In Rome, in conformity with a similar spirituality, a woman, far from 
being “equal” to man, was juridically regarded as a daughter of her own husband 
(tiliae loco) and as a sister of her own children (sororis loco); when she was a young 
girl, she was under the potestas of her father, who was the leader and the priest of his 
own gens; when she married, according to a rather blunt expression she was in manu 
viri. These traditional decrees regulating a woman’s dependency can also be found 
in other civilizations; 4 far from being unjust and arrogant, as the modem “free spir¬ 
its” are quick to decry, they helped to define the limits and the natural place of the 
only spiritual path proper to the pure feminine nature. 

I will mention here some ancient views that expressly describe the pure type of 
the traditional woman, who is capable of an offering that is half human and half 
divine. In the Aztec-Nahua tradition the same privilege of heavenly immortality 
proper to the warrior aristocracy was partaken of by the mothers who died while 
giving birth, since the Aztecs considered this sacrifice on the same level as the one 
made by those who die on the battlefield. Another example is the type of the tradi¬ 
tional Hindu woman, a woman who in the deepest recesses of her soul was capable 
of the most extreme forms of sensuality and yet who lived by an invisible and votive 
tides. By virtue of this tides , that offering that was manifested in the erotic dedication 
of her body, person, and will culminated in another type of offering—of a different 
kind and way beyond the world of the senses. Because of this tides the bride would 
leap into the funerary pyre in order to follow the man whom she had married into the 

3. “Apart from their husbands women cannot sacrifice or undertake a vow or fast; it is because a wife obeys 
her husband that she is exalted in heaven.” The Laws of Manu 5.155. It is not possible in this context to 
discuss the meaning of female priesthood and to explain why it docs not contradict the abovementioned 
example. Female priesthood traditionally had a lunar character; rather than representing another path 
available to women, it expressed an affirmation of feminine dhanna as an absolute elimination of any 
personal principle so as to make room for the voice of the oracle and of the god. Further on I will discuss 
the alteration proper of decadent civilizations in which the lunar, feminine element usurps the hierarchical 
peak. We must also consider the sacral and initiatory use of women in the “path of sex,” 

4. In an ancient Chinese text, the Niu-kic-tsi-pien (5) wc read: "When a woman leaves the house of her 

father to join the house of her husband, she loses everything, including her name. She does not own 

anything in her own right; whatever she has and whatever she is belongs to her husband." And in the Niu- 
hien-shu it is said that a woman must be in the house “as a shadow and as a mere echo." Quoted in S. 

Trovatelli, Le civilui e le legislnzioni deH'nntico Orienie (Bologna, 1890), 157-58. 


next life. This traditional sacrifice, which was regarded as a sheer “barbarism” by 
Europeans and by Westernized Hindus and in which the widow was burnt alive with 
the body of the dead husband, is called satnn Sanskrit, from the root as and the prefix 
sat (being), from which the word satya (the truth) comes; satT also signifies “gift,” 
“faithfulness,” “love.” 5 Therefore this sacrifice was considered as the supreme cul¬ 
mination of the relationship between two beings of a different sex and as the sign of 
an absolute type of relationship, from the point of view of truth and superhumanity. In 
this context man provides the role of the support for a liberating bhakti , and love 
becomes a door and a pathway. According to the traditional teaching the woman who 
followed her husband in death attained “heaven”; she was transformed into the same 
substance as her deceased husband 6 since she partook of that transfiguration (which 
occurred through the incineration of the material body) into a divine body of light, 
symbolized among Aryan civilizations by the ritual burning of the cadaver. 7 We find 
an analogous renunciation of life on the part of Germanic women if their husbands or 
lovers died in battle. 

I have previously suggested that, generally speaking, the essence of bhakti con¬ 
sists of indifference toward the object or foe means of an action, that is, in pure action 
and in a selfless attitude. This helps us understand how the ritual sacrifice of a widow 
(satf)could have been institutionalized in a traditional civilization such as the Hindu. 
Whenever a woman gives herself and even sacrifices herself only because of a 
stronger and reciprocated bond of human passion toward another being, her actions 
are still on the level of ordinary events; only when her dedication can support and 
develop itself without any other external motivation whatsoever, does she truly par¬ 
ticipate in a transcendent dimension. 

In Islam the institution of the harem was inspired by these motivations. In Chris¬ 
tian Europe it would take foe idea of God for a woman to renounce her public life 
and to withdraw to a cloistered life; and even in this case, this was the choice of only 
a very few. In Islam a man sufficed to provide such a motivation and the cloistered 
life of the harem was considered as a natural thing that no wellborn woman would 
ever criticize or intend to avoid; it seemed natural for a woman to concentrate all her 
life on one man only, who was loved in such a vast and unselfish way as to allow 

5. Analogous customs are also found among other Indo-European stocks: among the Thracians, the Greeks, 
the Scythians, and Slavs. In the Inca civilization the suicide of widows, though it was not decreed by a law, 
was nevertheless common practice; those women who had not the courage to commit suicide or believed 
they had good reasons not to commit it, were despised by their community. 

6. “The woman who is not unfaithful to her husband but restrains her mind and heart, speech, and body 
reaches her husband’s worlds after death, and good people call her a virtuous woman.” The Laws of Manu 
9.29. 

7. “In this fire the gods offer a person. From this oblation the man arises having the color of light.” Bfhud- 
tiranyaka Upani$ad 4.2A4. See also Prod us, In Tinieum, 5.331b; 2.65 b, 


160 


161 



The World of Tradition 


other women to share in the same feeling and to be united to him through the same 
bond and the same dedication. What surfaces in ail this is the character of “purity,” 
which is considered to be essential in this path. A love that sets conditions and re¬ 
quires the reciprocated love and the dedication of a man was reputed to be of an 
inferior kind. On the other hand, a real man could not know love in this way other 
than by becoming feminine, thus losing that inner self-sufficiency thanks to which a 
woman finds in him a support and something that motivates and excites her desire to 
totally give herself to him. According to the myth Siva, who was conceived as the 
great ascetic of the mountain peaks, turned Kama (the god of love) into ashes with a 
single glance when the latter tried to awaken in him passion for his bride, ParvatL 
Likewise, there is a profound meaning in the legend about the Kalki-avatara, which 
talks about a woman who could not be possessed by anybody because the men who 
desired her and fell in love with her turned into women as the result of their passion. 
As far as the woman is concerned, there is true greatness in her when she is capable 
of giving without asking for anything in return; when she is like a flame feeding 
itself; when she loves even more as the object of her love does not commit himself, 
does not open himself up, and even creates some distance; and finally, when the 
man is not perceived by her as a mere husband or lover, but as her lord. The spirit 
animating the harem consisted in the struggle to overcome jealousy and thus the 
passionate selfishness and the woman’s natural inclination to possess the man. A 
woman was asked to commit herself to the harem from her adolescence to her old 
age and to be faithful to a man who could enjoy other women beside herself and 
possess them all without “giving” himself to any one in particular. Jn this “inhuman” 
trait there was something ascetical and even sacred,* In this apparent reification of 
woman, she experienced a true possession, an overcoming, and even a liberation 
because vis-a-vis such an unconditional tides, a man, in his human appearance, was 
just a means to higher ends; thus she discovered new possibilities to achieve higher 
goals. Just as the rule of the harem imitated the rule of the convents, likewise the 
Islamic law regulating a woman’s life (according to the possibilities of her own na¬ 
ture, without excluding, but on the contrary, including and even exasperating the life 
of the senses) elevated her to the same plane of monastic asceticism. 9 To a lesser 

8. Jn The Lows ofManu it is written: “A girl, a young woman or even an old woman should not do anything 
independently, even in her own house. In childhood a woman should be under her father’s control, in 
youth under her husband’s, and when her husband is dead, under her sons’” (5.147-48). And also: ”A 
virtuous wife should constantly serve her husband like a god, even if he behaves badly, freely indulges his 
lust, and is devoid of any good qualities” (5.154). 

9. The sacral offering of the body and of virginity itself has been sanctioned in a rigorous form in what 
amounts to yet another cause of scandal for our contemporaries, namely, in sacred prostitution, which 
was practiced in ancient Syrian, Lician, Lidian, and Theban temples. The woman was not supposed to 
offer her virginity out of a passional motive toward a given man; she was supposed to give herself to the 
first man who tossed her a sacred coin within the sacred enclosure, as if it were a sacred offering to the 

162 


degree, an analogous attitude in a woman should be considered the natural presup¬ 
position in those civilizations, such as Greece and Rome, in which the institution of 
concubinage enjoyed a sort of regular character and was legally acknowledged as a 
way to complement the monogamic marriage and in which sexual exclusivism was 
overcome. 

It goes without saying that I am not referring here to the harem or analogous 
institutions in mere materialistic terms. I have in mind what the harem meant to the 
pure traditional idea, and the superior possibility inspiring these institutions. It is the 
task of Tradition to create solid riverbeds, so that the chaotic currents of life may 
flow in the right direction. Free are those people who, upon undertaking this tradi¬ 
tional direction, do not experience it as a burden but rather develop it naturally and 
recognize themselves in it so as to actualize through an inner elan the highest and 
most “traditional” possibility of their own nature. The others, those who blindly fol¬ 
low the institutions and obey and Jive them without understanding them are not what 
we may call “self-supported” beings: although devoid of light, their obedience virtu¬ 
ally leads them beyond their limitations as individuals and orients them in the same 
direction followed by those who are free. But for those who follow neither the spirit 
nor the form of the traditional riverbed, there is nothing but chaos; they are the lost, 
the “fallen” ones. 

This is the case of our contemporaries as far as the woman is concerned. And 
yet it was not possible that a world that has “overcome” (to employ a Jacobin 
term) the caste system by returning to every human being his or her own “dignity” 
and “rights” could preserve some sense of the correct relationship between the 
two sexes. The emancipation of women was destined to follow that of the slaves 
and the glorification of people without a caste and without traditions, namely, the 
pariah. In a society that no longer understands the figure of the ascetic and of the 
warrior; in which the hands of the latest aristocrats seem better fit to hold tennis 
rackets or shakers for cocktail mixes than swords or scepters; in which the arche¬ 
type of the virile man is represented by a boxer or by a movie star if not by the 
dull wimp represented by the intellectual, the college professor, the narcissistic 
puppet of the artist, or the busy and dirty money-making banker and the politi¬ 
cian—in such a society it was only a matter of time before women rose up and 
claimed for themselves a “personality” and a “freedom” according to the anar¬ 
chist and individualist meaning usually associated with these words. And while 


goddess of the temple. A woman was supposed to get married only after this ritual offering of her body. 
Herodotus (The Histories, 1.199) noted that: 1L The woman goes with the first man who throws her a coin, 
and rejects no one. When she has gone with him, and so satisfied the goddess, she returns home, and from 
that time forth no gift however great will prevail with her.” 

163 



The World or Tradiiioh 


traditional ethics asked men and women to be themselves to the utmost of their 
capabilities and express with radical traits their own gender-related characteris¬ 
tics—the new “civilization” aims at leveling everything since it is oriented to the 
formless and to a stage that is truly not beyond but on this side of the individuation 
and differentiation of the sexes. 

What truly amounts to an abdication was thus claimed as a “step forward.” 
After centuries of “slavery” women wanted to be themselves and to do whatever 
they pleased. But so-called feminism has not been able to devise a personality for 
women other than by imitating the male personality, so that the woman’s “claims” 
conceal a fundamental lack of trust in herself as well as her inability to be and to 
function as a real woman and not as a man. Due to such a misunderstanding, the 
modern woman has considered her traditional role to be demeaning and has taken 
offense at being treated “only as a woman.” This was the beginning of a wrong 
vocation; because of this she wanted to take her revenge, reclaim her “dignity,” 
prove her “true value” and compete with men in a man’s world. But the man she 
set out to defeat is not at all a real man, only the puppet of a standardized, rationa¬ 
lized society that no longer knows anything that is truly differentiated and qualita¬ 
tive. In such a civilization there obviously cannot be any room for legitimate privi¬ 
leges and thus women who are unable and unwilling to recognize their natural 
traditional vocation and to defend it (even on the lowest possible plane, since no 
woman who is sexually fulfilled ever feels the need to imitate and to envy man) 
could easily demonstrate that they too virtually possess the same faculties and 
talents—both material and intellectual—that are found in the other sex and that, 
generally speaking, are required and cherished in a society of the modem type. 
Man for his part has irresponsibly let this happen and has even helped and “pushed” 
women into the streets, offices, schools, and factories, into all the “polluted” cross¬ 
roads of modem culture and society. Thus the last leveling push has been im¬ 
parted. 

And wherever the spiritual emasculation of materialistic modem man did not 
tacitly restore the primacy (typically found in ancient gynaecocratic communities) 
of the woman as hetaera, ruling over men enslaved by their senses and at her 
service, the results have been the degeneration of the feminine type even in her 
somatic characteristics, the atrophy of her natural possibilities, the suppression of 
her unique inner life. Hence the types of the woman -gargonne and the shallow and 
vain woman, incapable of any elan beyond herself, utterly inadequate as far as 
sensuality and sinfulness are concerned because to the modem woman the possi¬ 
bilities of physical Love are often not as interesting as the narcissistic cult of her 
body, or as being seen with as many or as few clothes as possible, or as engaging 


in physical training, dancing, practicing sports, pursuing wealth, and so on. As it is, 
Europe knew very little about the purity of the offering and about the faithfulness 
of the one who gives her all without asking anything in return; or about a love strong 
enough so as not to be exclusivist. Besides a purely conformist and bourgeois 
faithfulness, the love Europe has celebrated is the love that does not tolerate the 
other person’s lack of commitment. Now when a woman, before consecrating 
herself to a man, pretends that he belongs to her body and soul, not only has she 
already “humanized” and impoverished her offering, but worse yet, she has begun 
to betray the pure essence of femininity in order to borrow characteristics typical 
of the male nature—and possibly the lowest of these: the yearning to possess and 
lay claims over another person, and the pride of the ego. After that, everything else 
came tumbling down in a rush, following the law of acceleration. Eventually, 
because of the woman’s increased egocentrism, men will no longer be of interest 
to her; she will only care about what they will be able to offer to satisfy her pleasure 
or her vanity. In the end she will even incur forms of corruption that usually accom¬ 
pany superficiality, namely, a practical and superficial lifestyle of a masculine type 
that has perverted her nature and thrown her into the same male pit of work, profits, 
frantic activity, and politics. 

The same holds true for the results of the Western “emancipation” of women, 
which is on its way to infecting the rest of the world faster than a plague. Tradi¬ 
tional woman or the absolute woman, in giving herself, in her living for another, 
in wanting to be only for another being with simplicity and purity fulfilled herself, 
belonged to herself, displayed her own heroism, and even became superior to 
ordinary men. Modem woman in wanting to be for herself has destroyed herself. 
The “personality” she so much yearned for is killing all semblance of female 
personality in her. 

It is easy to foresee what will become of the relationship between the sexes, 
even from a material point of view. Here too, like in magnetism, the higher and 
stronger the creative spark, the more radical the polarity; the more a man is a man, 
the more a woman is a woman. What could possibly go on between these mixed 
beings lacking all contact with the forces of their deepest nature? between these 
beings for whom sex is reduced to the physiological plane? between these beings 
who, in the deepest recesses of their souls, are neither men nor women, or who are 
masculine women or feminine men, and who claim to have reached full sexual eman¬ 
cipation while truly having only regressed? All relationships are destined to have an 
ambiguous and crumbling character: the comradely promiscuities and morbid “intel¬ 
lectual” sympathies such as are commonplace in the new communist realism. In 
other words, modem woman will be affected by neurotic complexes and all the other 


164 


165 



The World of Trhditioh 

complexes upon which Freud constructed a “science” that is truly a sign of our times. 
The possibilities of the world of the “emancipated” woman are not dissimilar: the 
avant-gardes of this world (North America and Russia) are already present, and give 
interesting and very meaningful testimonies to this fact . 10 

All this cannot but have repercussions on an order of things that goes way be- 
yond what our contemporaries, because of their recklessness, will ever suspect. 


10, According to some .statistics gathered in the 1950s (C. Freed and W. Kroger), an estimated 75 percent of 
North-American women are “sexually anesthetized/’ while their “libido” has allegedly shifted in the 
direction of exhibitionist narcissism. In Anglo-Saxon women, the neurotic and typically feminine sexual 
inhibition was typical of their culture and was due to their being victims of a false ideal of “dignity” in 
addition to the prejudices of puritan moralism. The reaction of the so-called sexual revolution has only 
led the masses to a regimen of quick, easy, and cheap sex treated as an item of consumption. 


166 


21 



The Decline of Superior Races 


T he modern world is far from being threatened by the danger of underpopulation; 

the cry of alarm some political leaders have launched in the past with the ab¬ 
surd slogan “there is power in numbers,” is totally unfounded. The truth is that we 
are facing an opposite danger: the constant and untrammeled increase of population 
in purely quantitative terms. The deterioration of the population affects only those 
stocks that should be considered the bearers of the forces that preside over the demos 
and the world of the masses and that contribute to any authentic human greatness. 
When I criticized the racist worldview I mentioned that occult power when present, 
alive, and at work constitutes the principle of a superior generation that reacts on the 
world of quantity by bestowing upon it a form and quality. In this regard, one can say 
that the superior Western races have been agonizing for many centuries and that the 
increasing growth in world population has the same meaning as the swarming of 
worms on a decomposing organism or as the spreading of cancerous cells: cancer is 
an uncontrolled hypertrophy of a plasma that devours the normal, differentiated struc¬ 
tures of an organism after subtracting itself from the organism’s regulating laws. 
This is the scenario facing the modem world: the regression and the decline of fecun¬ 
dating (in the higher sense of the term) forces and the forces that bear forms parallels 
the unlimited proliferation of “matter,” of what is formless, of the masses. 

This phenomenon must be related to what I have mentioned in the previous 
chapter concerning the sexes and concerning the relationship between men an( 
women in this day and age, since they affect the issue of procreation and its mean¬ 
ing. If it is true that the modem world seems destined not to know any longer what 
the absolute woman and the absolute man are all about, and if in this world the 
sexualization is incomplete, that is, limited to the corporeal plane—then it must seem 
natural that the superior and even transcendent dimensions of sex, known by the 
world of Tradition in multiple forms, have been lost, and that this loss may affect the 
regimen of sexual unions and the possibilities offered by them either as a pure erotic 


167 


1 



The World of tomon 


The Decufie of Superior Races 


experience or in view of a procreation that may not exhaust itself in a simple, opaque 
biological event. 

The world of Tradition effectively knew a sexual sacrum and a magic of sex. 
What constantly transpires in countless symbols and customs from all parts of the 
world is the acknowledgment of sex as a creative and primordial force, rather than 
as a generative power. 

In the woman, abyssal powers of passion and light, of danger and disintegra¬ 
tion, were evoked . 1 The chthonic power—namely, the Earth—lived in her while 
Heaven lived in man. Everything that is experienced by ordinary men in the form of 
peri-pheral sensations and passional and corporeal impulses was assumed in an or¬ 
ganic and conscious way. Generation was decreed 2 and the being who was gener¬ 
ated was willed as the “child of duty/’ namely, as one who must undertake and 
nourish the supernatural element of his stock and the liberation of the ancestor, and 
who must receive and pass on to future generations strength, life, and stability. To¬ 
day, all this has become an inane fancy; men, instead of being in control of sex are 
controlled by it and wander about like drunkards without having the least clue as to 
what takes place in the course of their embraces, and without seeing the guiding 
principle acting behind their quest for pleasure or behind their own passions. Without 
people being aware of any of this, beyond and often against their own will, what 
comes into existence as a result of their intercourse is a new being who will have no 
spiritual continuity and, as in the case of the most recent generations, even without 
the pale residue constituted by bourgeois affective bonds. 

This being the case, it is no wonder the superior races are dying out before the 
ineluctible logic of individualism, which especially in the so-called contemporary 
“higher classes,” has caused people to lose all desire to procreate. Not to mention all 
the other degenerative factors connected to a mechanized and urbanized social life 
and especially to a civilization that no longer respects the healthy and creative limi¬ 
tations constituted by the castes and by the traditions of blood lineage. Thus prolif¬ 
eration is concentrated in the lower social classes and in the inferior races where the 
animal-like impulse is stronger than any rational calculation and consideration. The 
unavoidable effects are a reversed selection and the ascent and the onslaught of 
inferior elements against which the “race” of the superior castes and people, now 
exhausted and defeated, can do very little as a spiritually dominating element. 

1. J. Evola, Bros and the Mysteries of Love, especially chapters 5 (“Sacred Ceremonies and Evocations” ) 
and 6 (“Sex in the Realm of Initiations and Magic”). 

2. In the Upani$ads there are some expressions that describe sexual intercourse: “With power and glory I 

give you glory.” Also: ‘This man (ama) am [; that woman (sa), thou! That woman thou, this man am I. I am 
the heaven; thou the earth! Come, let us two together clasp! Together let us semen mix, a male, a son For 
to procure.” ( Bfhad-ilranyiika Upanisad 6.4.8; 6.4.20-22.) 


Though today people talk more frequently about “population control” in view of 
the catastrophic effects of the demographies I phenomenon that I have compared to a 
cancer, this still does not address the essential issue, since a differentiated and quali¬ 
tative criterion does not come into play at all. But those who oppose population 
control on the basis of traditionalist and pseudomoralistic ideas, which nowadays 
amount to mere prejudices, are guilty of an even greater obtuseness. If what really 
matters is the greatness and the might of a stock, it is useless to be concerned about 
the material quality of fatherhood unless an equal concern for its spiritual dimension 
is present as well in the sense of superior interests, of the correct relationship be¬ 
tween the sexes, and above all, of what is really meant by virility —of what it still 
signifies on a plane that is not merely naturalistic. 

After exposing the decadence of modem woman, we must not forget that man is 
mostly responsible for such a decadence. Just like the plebeian masses would have 
never been able to make their way into all the domains of social life and of civiliza¬ 
tion if real kings and real aristocrats would have been in power, likewise, in a society 
run by real men, woman would never have yearned for or even been capable of 
taking the path she is following today. The periods in which women have reached 
autonomy and preeminence almost always have coincided with epochs marked b) 
manifest decadence in ancient civilizations. Thus, the best and most authentic reac¬ 
tion against feminism and against every other female aberration should not be aimed 
at women as such, but at men instead. It should not be expected of women that they 
return to what they really are and thus reestablish the necessary inner and outer 
conditions for a reintegration of a superior race, when men themselves retain only 
the semblance of true virility. 

If all efforts to reawaken the spiritual dimension of sexuality fail, and if the form 
of virility is not separated from whaL has become an amorphous and promiscuous 
spiritual substance, then everything is in vain. The virility that is physical, phallic, 
muscular, and animal is lifeless and does not contain any creative germ in the supe¬ 
rior sense. Phallic man deceives himself by thinking that he dominates; the truth is 
that he is passive and is always susceptible to the subtler power of women and to the 
feminine principle. 3 The differentiation of the sexes is authentic and absolute only in 
the spirit. 

In all superior types of Tradition, man has al ways been considered the bearer of 
the lineage of the Uranian, solar principle; this principle transcends the mere “blood” 
principle, which is lost as soon as it converges into the feminine lineage. Its develop¬ 
ment is favored by the fertile ground represented by a pure woman belonging to a 

3. J. Evola, Bros and the Mysteries of Love, 


168 


169 



The World of tauon 


The Declihe of Superior Races 


higher caste, but in any event, it always remains the qualifying principle that bestows 
a form and that orders the feminine generating substance . 4 This principle is related to 
the same supernatural element, to the power that can ‘'make the current ascend 
upward” and of which "victory,” "fortune,” and prosperity of a particular stock are 
usually the consequences. Hence the symbolical association (which did not have an 
obscene, but rather a real and deep meaning), typical of ancient traditional forms , 5 of 
the male organ with ideas of resurrection, asceticism, and energies that confer the 
highest powers. As an echo of superior meanings found even among savage popula¬ 
tions, we find expressed in clear terms the idea that only the initiate is a true male, 
and that initiation marks in an eminent way one’s entrance into virility; this means 
that prior to initiation, the individuals, notwithstanding their physical appearance, 
"have not yet turned into men,” and even if they are old they belong to the same 
group of children and women and are deprived of all the privileges of the clan’s virile 
elites. When the superbiological element that is the center and the measure of true 
virility is lost, people can call themselves men, but in reality they are just eunuchs 
and their paternity simply reflects the quality of animals who, blinded by instinct, 
procreate randomly other animals, who in turn are mere vestiges of existence. 

If the expired civilization is propped up so as to make it look alive, and if men 
are treated like rabbits or stallions, their unions being carefully and rationally planned, 
let no one be fooled; what they will generate will either be a civilization of very 
beautiful animals destined to work, or, if the individualistic and utilitarian element 
predominates, a stronger law will lead the races toward the path of regression or 
extinction according to the same inexorability of the law of entropy and the degrada¬ 
tion of energy. What will then be registered by future historians is only one of the 
several aspects of the "decline of the West” that are today very much in evidence. 


4. “Of the seed and the womb, the seed is said to be more important, for the offspring of all living beings are 
marked by the mark of the seed. Whatsoever sort of seed is sown in a field prepared at the right season, 
precisely that sort of seed grows in it, manifesting its own particular qualities.” The Laws ol'Munu , 9.35- 
36. On this basis the caste system even practiced hypergamy: the man from a higher caste was allowed to 
marry women of lower castes, no matter how high his caste was (The Laws ofManu, 3.13). It is possible 
to find among savage populations the idea of the duality of the blood and the spirit that is passed on 
exclusively through the male lineage. 

5. In the Hindu tradition the male semen is often called virya. a term that in texts describing ascetical 
practices (cspecia lly Buddhist) is also used to designate that “upward-streaming” force that has the power 
of spiritually renewing all the human faculties. As a sign of distinction Saivite ascetics and yogis carry the 
phallus emblem around their necks. The reason why in places like Lydia, Phrygia, and Etruria tombs were 
ornate with phalli or with statues of an ithyphallic form was to express the association between the virile 
force and the power of resurrection. Likewise, in ancient Hellenism, the ithyphallic He macs represented 
the resurrected primordial man “who did, does, and will stand” through the various phases of the manifes¬ 
tation (Hippolytus, Phiiosophumena, 5.8.14). An echo of this reverberates in an ancient Roman supersti¬ 
tion that regarded the phallus as an amulet capable of warding off fascinations and nefarious influences. 


By way of introduction to the second part of this work, let me make a final point that 
is directly related to what I have previously mentioned concerning the relationships 
between spiritual virility and devotional religiosity. From these last considerations 
what has emerged is that what in the West goes by the name of "religion” truly 
corresponds to an essentially "feminine” orientation. The relationship with the su¬ 
pernatural, conceived in a personalized form (theism) as dedication, devotion, and 
inner renunciation of one’s own will before the divine hypostasis presents the typical 
traits of the path on which a feminine nature may realize itself. 

Moreover and, generally speaking, if the feminine element corresponds to the 
naturalistic element, then it is easy to see why in the world of Tradition the inferior 
castes and races (in which the naturalistic element was more predominant than in 
those castes and races governed by the power of aristocratic rituals and divine heri¬ 
tage) benefited from the participation in a higher order precisely through relation¬ 
ships of a "religious” type. Thus, even "religion” could have a place and exercise its 
function within the whole hierarchy, though subordinated and relative to higher forms 
of spiritual realization such as initiation and the various types of higher asceticism. 

Following the mixing of the castes or of analogous social bodies and the coming 
to power of the inferior social strata and races, it was unavoidable that their spirit 
triumphed even in this regard; that any relationship with the supernatural would be 
conceived exclusively in terns of "religion”; that any other higher form came under 
suspicion and was even stigmatized as sacrilegious and demonic. This feminization 
of spirituality was already foreshadowed in ancient times. Wherever it prevailed, it 
determined the first alteration of the primordial tradition in the races. 

The object of the considerations I wil l articulate in the second part of my work is 
to analyze this process of decadence together with all those processes that have led 
to the collapse of primordial humanity; through these the genesis and face of the 
"modern world” will become manifest. 


170 


171 



Geneiit and 
of the dlodem 


face 



Many things are known by the Wise. They foresee many things; the 
decline of the world and the end of the Aesir. 

— Voluspa, 44 


I reveal to you a secret. The time has come when the Groom will crown 
the Bride. But where is the crown? In the North ... And whence comes 
the Groom? From the Center, where the heat generates the Light and 
turns towards the North ... where the Light becomes radiant. What are 
the people living in the South doing? They have fallen asleep m the 
heat; but they will re a waken in the storm and many among them will be 
terrified unto death. 


—J. Boehme, Aurora, 2.11.43 



Introduction 


I would like to point out the difference between the methodology employed in the 
first part of this work and the methodology adopted in the second part. 

In the first part, which had a morphological and typological character, I attempted 
to draw from various testimonies those elements that were more suitable for charac¬ 
terizing, in a universal and metahistorical fashion, the nature of the traditional spirit 
and the traditional view of the world, of man, and of life. Therefore, I neglected to 
examine the relationship between the chosen elements and the overall spirit of the 
different historical traditions to which they belonged. Those elements that in the 
context of a particular and concrete tradition did not conform to the traditional spirit 
were considered to be absent and unable to influence the value and the meaning of 
the rest of the elements. I did not even attempt to determine up to what point certain 
attitudes and historical institutions had truly been “traditional” in the spirit rather 
than just the form. 

Now my approach is going to be different. I will attempt to follow the dynamic 
unfolding of the traditional and antitraditional forces in history, and therefore it will 
no longer be possible to apply the same methodology; it will be impossible to isolate 
and to bring out some particular elements in the complex of various historical civili¬ 
zations because of their “traditional potential.” The overall spirit of a given civiliza¬ 
tion and the way it has concretely utilized all of the elements included in it, will now 
become the relevant and specific object of my discussion. The synthetic consider¬ 
ation of the forces at work will replace my analysis, which had previously isolated 
the valid elements. I will attempt to discover the “dominating factor” within the 
various historical complexes and to determine the value of the different elements, 
not in an absolute and abstract way, but according to the action they exercised within 
a given civilization. 

While so far I have attempted to integrate the historical and particular element 
with the ideal, universal, and “typical” element, I will henceforth attempt to integrate 


175 



Gtotw m Face of the Mom UUorld 

the ideal element with the real one. The latter integration, just like the former, more 
than following the methods and the results of the researches of modem critical histo¬ 
riography, is going to be based mainly on a “traditional” and metaphysical perspec¬ 
tive, on the intuition of a sense that cannot be deduced from the individual elements 
but that presupposes them; by beginning from this sense it is possible to grasp the dif¬ 
ferent instrumental and organic roles that such elements may have played in various 
eras of the past and in the different historically conditioned forms. 

Therefore, it may happen that whatever has been left out in the first integration 
will become prominent in the second integration, and vice versa; in the framework 
of a given civilization some elements may be valued and considered to be decisive, 
while in other civilizations they are present but in the background and deemed to be 
irrelevant. 

This warning may be helpful to a certain category of readers. To shift from the 
consideration of Tradition as metahistory to the consideration of Tradition as history 
implies a change of perspectives; it causes the same elements to be valued differ¬ 
ently; it causes united things to become separated and separated things to unite ac¬ 
cording to whatever the contingencies of history may determine from case to case. 


176 


22 



The Doctrine of the Four Ages 


A lthough modern man until recently has viewed and celebrated the meaning of 
. the history known to him as epitomizing progress and evolution, the truth as 
professed by traditional man is quite the opposite. In all the ancient testimonies of 
traditional humanity it is possible to find, in various forms, the idea of a regression or 
a fall: from originally higher states beings have stooped to states increasingly condi¬ 
tioned by human, mortal, and contingent elements. This involutive process allegedly 
began in a very distant past; the term that best characterizes it is the Eddie term 
ragna-rokkr, “the twilight of the gods.” In the traditional world this teaching was not 
expressed in a vague and generic form, but rather was articulated in the organic 
doctrine of the four ages, which can be found with a large degree of uniformity in 
different civilizations. According to Tradition, the actual sense of history and the 
genesis of what I have labeled, generally speaking, as the “modem world,” results 
from a process of gradual decadence through four cycles or “generations.” 

The best known form of the doctrine of the four ages is that which was typical of 
the Greco-Roman tradition. Hesiod wrote about four eras symbolized by four metals 
(gold, silver, bronze, and iron), inserting between the last two a fifth era, the era of 
the “heroes,” which as we shall see, had only the meaning of a partial and special 
restoration of the primordial state . 1 The Hindu tradition knows the same doctrine in 
the form of four cycles, called respectively, Satya Yuga (orKrta Yuga), Treta Yuga, 
Dvapara Yuga, and Kali Yuga (or Dark Age ), 2 together with the simile of the failing, 
during each of these, of one of the four hoofs or supports of the bull symbolizing 
dharma, or the traditional law. The Persian version of this myth is similar to the 
Hellenic version: the four ages are known and characterized by gold, silver, steeL, 
and an “iron compound.” The Chaldean version articulated this same view in almost 
identical terms. 


1. Hesiod, Works and Days, 5.109 ff. 

2. The Laws of Manu, 1.8 1-83. 


177 



Geoesis (iod Face of the HIoderu World 


The Doetrire of the Four Ages 


In particular, we can find a more recent simile of the chariot of the universe 
represented as a quadriga led by the supreme god; the quadriga is carried along a 
circular course by four horses representing the elements. The four ages were be¬ 
lieved to correspond to the alternate predominance of each of these horses, which 
then leads the others according to the more or less luminous and rapid symbolic 
nature of the element that it represents . 3 This view reappears, although in a special 
transposition, in the Hebrew tradition. In one of the prophetic writings 4 5 mention is 
made of a very bright statue with the head made of gold, the chest and the arms of 
silver, the belly and the thighs of copper, the legs and the feet, of iron and tile. This 
statue’s four parts represent the four “kingdoms” that follow one another, beginning 
with the golden kingdom of the “king of kings” who has received “dominion, strength, 
power, and glory from the god of Heaven.” If Egypt knew the tradition mentioned by 
Eusebius concerning three distinct dynasties consisting respectively of gods, demi¬ 
gods, and manes , we can see in them the equivalent of the first three ages (golden, 
silver, and bronze). Likewise, the ancient Aztec traditions speak about five suns or 
solar cycles, the first four of which correspond to the elements and in which, as in the 
Eurasian traditions, one finds portrayed the catastrophes of fire, water (flood), and 
the struggles against giants characterizing the cycle of “heroes” that Hesiod added to 
the other four-—in this we may recognize a variation of the same teaching, the memory 
of which may also be found more or less fragmentsrily among other populations. 

Upon examining the meaning of each of these periods, it is opportune to antici¬ 
pate some general considerations, since the abovementioned view is in open con¬ 
trast with the modem views concerning prehistory and the primordial world. To up¬ 
hold with Tradition that in the beginning there were no animal-like cavemen, but 
rather “more-than-human” beings, and that in ancient prehistory there was no “civi¬ 
lization” but an “era of the gods”; 3 this to many people—who in one way or another 
believe in the gospel of Darwinism—amounts to pure and simple “mythology.” Since 
I have not invented this mythology myself, however, critics still have to explain its 
existence, that is, the fact that according to the most ancient testimonies and writings 
there is no memory that may lend support to “evolutionism”; what is found in them 
instead is the opposite, in other words, the recurrent idea of a better, blighter, and 
superhuman (“divine”) past. These same testimonies also know very little about 
“animal origins”; constant mention is made rather of the original relationship be¬ 
tween men and deities; and a memory is kept alive of a primordial state of immortal¬ 
ity together with the idea that the law of death appeared at one particular moment, 

3. Dio Chrysostom, Orationes, 36.39. 

4. Daniel 2:31-45. 

5. Cicero. Dc legibus 2.11: “Antiquitus proximo accedit ad deos"{Anc\en\ times came very close to the gods). 


almost as an unnatural fact or as an anathema. In two characteristic testimonies, the 
cause of the “fall” was identified with the mixing of the “divine” race with the hu¬ 
man race, which was regarded as inferior; in some texts that “sin” is compared to 
sodomy and to sexual mating with animals. On the one hand there is the biblical 
myth of the Ben Elohim, “the children of the gods,” who mated with the “daughters 
of men,” with the consequence that in the end, “all mortals led depraved lives on 
earth .” 6 On the other hand there is the Platonic myth of the inhabitants of Atlantis, 
conceived as the descendants and disciples of the gods, who lost the divine element 
and eventually allowed their human nature to become predominant because of their 
repeated intermingling with human beings . 7 Tradition, in more recent eras, devel¬ 
oped a variety of myths referring to races as bearers of civilization and to the struggles 
between divine races and animal, cyclopic, or demonic races. They are the Aesir 
against the Elementarwesen; the Olympians and the heroes against giants and mon¬ 
sters of the darkness, die water, and the earth. They are the Aryan deva fighting 
against the asura ,“the enemies of the divine heroes”; they are the Incas, thedomina- 
tors who impose their solar laws on the aborigines who worshipped “Mother Earth”; 
they are the Tuatha deDanaan, who, according to Irish legends overcame the dread¬ 
ful race of the Fomors; and so on. On this basis it can be argued that even though the 
traditional teaching retains the memory of the existence of stocks that could even 
correspond to the animalistic and inferior types described in the theory of evolution 
(this was the substratum predating the civilizations created by superior races), evolu¬ 
tionism mistakenly considers these animal-like stocks to be absolutely primordial, 
while they are so only relatively. 

Another mistake of evolutionism is to conceive of some fonns of miscegenation 
that presuppose the emergence of other races that are superior either as civilizations 
and biological specimens or as products of “evolution.” These races had their own 
origins; because so much time has elapsed (as in the case of the “Hyperborean” and 
the “Atlantic” races) and because of geophysical factors, these races have left very 
few traces of their existence and what remains is difficult to spot by those who are 
merely seeking archaeological and paleontological traces accessible to profane re¬ 
search. 

On the other hand, it is significant that populations that still live in the alleged 
original, primitive, and “innocent” state provide little comfort to the evolutionist 

6. Gen. 6:4-13. 

7. Plato, Critias, 110c; 120d-e; 12la—b: “As long as the divine clement in their nature survived, they obeyed 
the laws and loved the divine to which they were akin. But when the divine clement in them became 
weakened by frequent admixture with mortal stock, and their human traits became predominant, they 
ceased to be able to carry their spiritual legacy with moderation.” 


178 


179 



Gcncju id Face of the IHoderii ULIorld 


THE DoCTRIFIE OF THE FOUR fl&ES 


hypothesis. These stocks, instead of evolving, tend to become extinguished, thereby 
demonstrating themselves to be the degenerate residues of cycles the vital potential 
of which has long since been exhausted; in other words, they are heterogeneous 
elements and remnants left behind by the mainstream of humanity. This was the 
case of the Neanderthal man, who in his extreme morphological brutishness closely 
resembles the “ape-man.” Neanderthal man mysteriously disappeared in a given 
period and the races that followed (Aurignacian man and especially Cro-Magnon 
man), and that represented a superior type (so much so that we can recognize in it the 
stock of several contemporary human races), cannot be considered further “evolu¬ 
tionary stages” of this vanished type. The same goes for the Grimaldi race, which 
also became extinct, and for the many “primitive” populations still in existence: they 
are not “evolving,” but rather becoming extinct. Their “becoming civilized” is not an 
“evolution” but almost always represents a sudden mutation that affects their vital 
possibilities. There are species that retain their characteristics even in conditions 
that are relatively different from their natural ones; other species in similar circum¬ 
stances instead become extinct; otherwise what takes place is racial mixing with 
other elements in which no assimilation or real evolution occurs. The result of this 
interbreeding closely resembles the processes that follow Mendel’s Jaws concerning 
heredity: once it disappears in the phenotype, the primitive element survives in the 
form of a separated, latent heredity that is capable of cropping up in sporadic appa¬ 
ritions, even though it is always endowed with a character of heterogeneity in regard 
to the superior type. 

Evolutionists believe they are “positively” sticking to the facts. They ignore that 
the facts per se are silent, and that if inteipreted in different ways they can lend 
support to the most incredible hypotheses. It has happened, however, that someone, 
though fully infonned of all the data that are adduced to prove the theory of evolu¬ 
tion, has shown these data to support the opposite thesis, which in more than one 
respect corresponds to the traditional teaching. I am referring to the thesis according 
to which man is not alone in being far from a product of the “evolution” of animal 
species, but many animal species must be considered as the offshoots or as the “abor¬ 
tions” of a primordial impulse; only in the racially superior human species does this 
primordial impulse find its direct and adequate manifestation . 8 There are also an¬ 
cient myths about the struggle between divine races and monstrous entities or ani¬ 
mal-like demons that allegedly took place before the advent of the human race (hu¬ 
manity at its earliest stage). These myths may refer to the struggle of the primordial 

8. Douglas Dewur, The Trnnsformist Illusion (1957). 


human principle against its intrinsic animalistic potentialities, which were eventu¬ 
ally isolated and left behind, so to speak, in the form of certain animal stocks. As far 
as the alleged “ancestors” of mankind (such as the anthropoid and the Ice Man) are 
concerned, they could represent the first casualties in the above-mentioned struggle 
or the best human elements that have been mixed together with or swept away by 
animal potentialities. If in totemism, which is found in inferior societies, the notion of 
the mythical collective ancestor of the clan is often confused with that of the demon 
of a given animal species, this appears to reflect the memory of a similar stage of 
promiscuity. 

Although this is not the proper context to raise the issues related to anthro- 
pogenesis, which are to a certain degree of a transcendent nature, the absence of 
human fossils and the sole presence of animal fossils in remote prehistory may be 
inteipreted to mean that primordial mankind (provided that we may call primordial 
“man” a type that would be very different from historical mankind) was the last form 
of life to undergo the process of materialization, which process endowed the earlier, 
animal-like human species with an organism capable of being. 

We may recall here that in some traditions there is the memory of a primordial 
race characterized by “weak” or “soft bones.” For instance Lieh-tzu, when talking 
about the Hyperborean region in which the present cycle began, mentioned that the 
inhabitants of this region have “soft bones.” In more recent times, the fact that supe¬ 
rior races that came from the North did not bury but cremated their dead, is just 
another factor that needs to be considered when facing the dilemma caused by the 
absence of pieces of bones. 

Somebody may object: “There is no trace whatsoever of this fantastic man¬ 
kind!” Besides being somewhat naive to think that superior beings could not have 
existed without leaving behind traces such as ruins, utensils, weapons, and so on, it 
must be noted that in relatively recent eras there are residues of cyclopic works, 
though not all of them are typical of a civilized society (the circle at Stonehenge; 
enormous stones put in a precarious and miraculous equilibrium; the pedra cansada 
in Peru; the colossus of Tiuhuanac and the like). The archaeologists are baffled as to 
what means were employed just to gather and transport the necessary material. Go¬ 
ing back in time, not only should we not conveniently forget what has already been 
admitted or at least not excluded a priori (that is, the existence of ancient lost lands 
and also that some lands were formed in recent geological eras), but we should also 
wonder whether it is fair to exclude a priori that a race in direct spiritual contact with 
cosmic forces ever existed (as tradition claims to be the case in the origins) just 
because it did not work on materials such as stone or metal, like those races that no 
longer have the means to act in accord with the power of the elements and beings. 


180 


181 



Geheeii hod Face of the Modem LUorld 


The DocrRint of the Four Ogee 


Rather, it seems to me that the “caveman” is itself a legend: it seems that “primi¬ 
tive man did not employ caves (many of which betray a sacred orientation) as ani¬ 
mal-like dwellings but as places of a cult that has remained in this form even in 
undoubtedly civilized eras (such as the Greek-Minoan cult of caves and the cer¬ 
emonies and the initiatory retreats on Mount Ida); it is only natural to find therein 
only traces, as a natural protection of the site, which in other sites the combined work 
of time, men, and the elements did not leave behind for our contemporaries. 

According to a very basic traditional idea, generally speaking, the state of knowl¬ 
edge and of civilization was the natural state, if not of mankind in general, at least of 
certain primordial elites; and knowledge was not constructed and acquired just as 
true kingship did not originate from below. Joseph de Maistre, after remarking that 
what Rousseau and his epigones assumed to be the “natural” state (in reference to 
savages) is only the last stage of brutishness of some stocks that have either been 
scattered or suffered the consequences of some primordial act of degradation that 
affected their deepest substance, correctly pointed out: 

As far as the development of science is concerned, we are blinded by a 
gioss misunderstanding; that is, to assume a judgmental attitude toward 
those times in which men saw effects in the causes, on the basis of 
times in which men with effort ascended from the effects to the causes; 
in which people only care about effects; in which it is said that it is 
useless to be concerned about causes; and in which people have forgot¬ 
ten what a cause really means , 5 

In the beginning mankind not only possessed a science, but 

A very different science, which originated from above and was there¬ 
fore very dangerous. This explains why in the beginning science was 
always mysterious and confined to the temples, in which it eventually 
became extinct when the only thing this “flame" could do was to bum.'" 

Ihus, another science was slowly formed as a surrogate, namely, the merely human 
and empirical science of which our contemporaries are so proud and through which 
they have thought fit to judge everything that they consider to be civilization. This 
“science” merely represents the futile attempt to climb back up, through surrogates, 


from an unnatural and degenerated state (what is most sad is that it is no longer even 
perceived to be such) that did not characterize the origins at all. 

In any event one must realize that these and similar indications will play a mini¬ 
mal role for those who are not determined to change their own frame of mind. Every 
epoch has its own “myth” through which it reflects a given collective climate. Today 
the aristocratic idea that mankind has higher origins, namely, a past of light and of 
spirit, has been replaced by the democratic idea of evolutionism, which derives the 
higher from the lower, man from animal, civilization from barbarism. This is not so 
much the “objective” result of a free and conscious scientific inquiry, but rather one 
of the many reflections that the advent of the modem world, characterized by infe¬ 
rior social and spiritual strata and by man without traditions, has necessarily pro¬ 
duced on the intellectual and cultural plane. Thus we should not delude ourselves: 
some “positive” superstitions will always produce alibis to defend themselves. The 
acknowledgment of new horizons will be possible not through the discovery of new 
“findings,” but rather through a new attitude toward these findings. Any attempt to 
validate even from a scientific perspective what the traditional dogmatic point of 
view upholds will generate results only among those who are already spiritually well 
disposed to accept this kind of knowledge. 


9. J. de Maistre, Soires de St. Petersburg (Paris, 1924), 1.63. 

10. Ibid., 1.82. One of the things de Maistre points out is that the ancient languages are more essential 
organic, and logical than modem ones; they reveal a hidden formative, nonhuman principle, especially 
when the ancient or “primitive” languages obviously contain fragments of even older languages that 
have either been lost or fallen into disuse, an eventuality hinted at by Plato himself. 


182 


183 



23 



The Golden Age 


I will now engage in an ideal and morphological assessment of the cycles corre¬ 
sponding to the four traditional eras; further on I will discuss their geographical 
and historical trajectories. 

First of all, the Golden Age: this era corresponds to an original civilization that 
was naturally and totally in conformity with what has been called the “traditional 
spirit.” For this reason, in both the location and the stock that the Golden Age is 
historically and metahistorically associated with, we find symbols and attributes that 
characterize the highest function of regality—symbols of polarity, solarity, height, 
stability, glory, and life in a higher sense. In later epochs and in particular traditions, 
which are already mixed and scattered, the dominating (in a traditional sense) elites 
effectively appeared as those who still enjoyed or reproduced the state of being of 
the origins. This allows us—through a shift from the derivative to the integral, so to 
speak—to deduce also from the titles and the attributes of those dominating strata of 
society some elements that may help us to characterize the nature of the first era. 

The first era is essentially the era of Being, and hence of truth in a transcendent 
sense . 1 This is evident not only from the Hindu designation of Satya Yuga (sat means 
being, hence satya or “truth”) but also from the Latin name “Saturn,” who is the king 
or god of the Golden Age. Saturn, who corresponds to the Hellenic Kronos, is a 
subtle reference to this idea, since in his name we find the Aryan root sat, “being,” 
together with the attributive ending umus (as in noctumus ). 2 As far as the era of 
Being or of spiritual stability is concerned, we shall see below that in several repre¬ 
sentations of the primordial site in which this cycle unfolded it is possible to find the 
symbols of “terra firma” surrounded by waters, or of the “island,” the mountain, or 
the “middle land.” 

1. Purity of heart, justice, wisdom, and adherence to sacred institutions are qualities that characterized every 
caste during the first age. See Vi^nu Parana 1.6. 

2. Introduzione alia magia (Genoa, 1955) 2.80 ff. 


184 


The Golden Hoe 


As the age of Being the first era is also the era of the Living in the eminent 
sense of the word. According to Hesiod, death—which for most people is truly an 
end that bequeaths Hades—made its appearance only during the last two ages (the 
Iron and Bronze ages). During Kronos’s Golden Age “mortal people lived as if they 
were gods” (ioog T£ Oeoi), and “no miserable old age came their way.” That cycle 
ended, “but those men continue to live upon the earth [roi jd£V . . . eim]” in an 
invisible way, “mantling themselves in dark mist and watching [r]£pa eoaapevoi] 
over mortal men ”; 3 these words allude to the previously mentioned doctrine ac¬ 
cording to which the representatives of the primordial tradition, as well as their 
original site, disappeared. In the realm of Yima, the Persian king of the Golden 
Age, before the new cosmic events forced him to withdraw into a “subterranean” 
refuge (the inhabitants of which were thus enabled to evade the dark and painful 
destiny befallen the new generations), there was “neither disease nor death .” 4 Yima, 
“the brilliant, the most glorious of those yet to be bom, the sunlike one of men,” 
banished death from his kingdom . 5 Just as in Saturn’s golden kingdom, according to 
both Romans and Greeks, men and immortal gods shared one common life, the 
rulers of the first of the mythical Egyptian dynasties were called Oeoi, “gods,” or 
“divine beings.” According to a Chaldean myth, death reigns universally only in 
the postdiluvian era, in which the “gods” left death to men while keeping eternal 
life for themselves , 6 Tir na mBeo, the “Land of the Living,” and Tir na nOg, the 
“Land of Youth,” are the names in the Celtic traditions of an island or a mysterious 
Atlantic land the Druids believed to be the birthplace of mankind. In the saga (ea) 
of Conall Ceamach where this land is identified with the “Land of the Victorious 
One” (Tir na Boadag), it is called “the Land of the Living, in which there is no 
death or old age .” 7 

Moreover, the relationship that the first era always has with gold symbolizes 
what is incorruptible, solar, luminous, and bright. In the Hellenic tradition gold had a 
relationship with the radiant splendor of light and with everything that is sacred and 

3. Hesiod, Works and Days, 5.108-202, 

4. Venciidad, 2.5. 

5. Yasna, 9.4. Immortality in this context should be regarded as the condition enjoyed by an indestructible 
soul; therefore there is no contradiction with the longevity that in other traditions characterizes the mate¬ 
rial or physical life of men during the first age. 

6. Gilgamesh, 10. In Gen. 6:3, a finite life span (one hundred and twenty years) appeared only at a given 
moment, thus putting an end to a state of tension between the divine spirit and mankind; that moment 
corresponds to the beginning of the “Titanic” cycle (third age). In several traditions of primitive popula¬ 
tions we find the idea that one never dies because of natural circumstances, since death is always an 
accident and a violent and unnatural event that should rather be explained through the intervention of 
adverse magical powers; in this belief we find an echo of the memory of the origins, although in a super¬ 
stitious form. 

1. P. W. Joyce, Old Celtic Romances (London, 1879), 106-11. 


185 



Genesis dfiD Face of the ITlQDERn LUorld 


The Goldeei Age 


great ; 8 * thus anything that was bright, radiant, and beautiful was designated as “gold¬ 
en. In the Vedic tradition the “primordial germ,” hiranya-garbha, was golden; it 
was also said: “For gold indeed is fire, light, and immortality.'In the Egyptian 
tradition the king was believed to be made of gold or of the same “solar fluid” the 
inconuptible body of the heavenly gods and the immortals was made of, so much so 
that the title ‘golden” applied to the king (“Horus made of gold”) and designated his 
divine and solar origin, his incorruptibility and indestructibility. Plato believed gold 
to be the distinctive element that characterized the nature of the race of rulers . 10 * 
From the golden top of Mount Meru, which was considered to be a “pole,” the origi¬ 
nal homeland of mankind, and the Olympian seat of the gods; and from the golden 
top of the “ancient Asgard,” which was believed to be the seat of the Aesir and of the 
divine Nordic kings located in the “Middle Abode”;" to the “Pure Land” (ching-fu) 
and to equivalent locations portrayed in Chinese traditions—time and time again we 
find the concept of the original cycle in which the spiritual quality symbolized by 
gold had its definitive and most eminent manifestation. We may also assume that in 
several myths that mention the deposit or the transmission of some golden object, 
reference is being made to the deposit or transmission of something closely related 
to the primordial tradition. According to the Eddie myth, immediately following the 
ragna-rokkrCtht twilight of the gods”) a new race and a new sun will arise; then the 
Aesir will be brought together again, and they will discover the mysterious golden 
tablets that they possessed in the time of the origins . 12 


Equivalent ideas or further explicitations of the golden symbol during the first 
era are light, splendor, and the “glory,” in that specific triumphal meaning that I 
already explained when discussing the concept of the Mazdean hvnreno. According 
to the Persian tradition, the primordial land (Airyana Vaego) inhabited by the “seed” 
of the Aryan race and by Yima himself, who was called “The Glorious and the 
Radiant One,” was regarded as “the first of the good lands and countries created by 
Ahura Mazda .” 13 According to an equivalent figuration found in the Hindu tradition, 
the Sveta-dvlpa, the “white island or continent” situated in the north (just like Aztlan, 
the northern primordial seat of the Aztecs, which implies the idea of whiteness or 
brightness) is the place of tejas, of a radiant force, and inhabited by the divine 


8. Pindar, The Olympian Odes, 1.1. 

9 .Satnpatha Brfihmana, 13.4.7. 

10. "The god who fashioned yon mixed gold in the composition of those among you who arc fit to rule, so that 
ey are of the mo.,, precious quality.” Republic, 4150. The golden symbol was applied again (468c) to 

the heroes, with an explicit reference to the primordial race. 

12 AS84rd " Shil ' eS ' ike * roora covcred wkh Sold, on tire top ofGimle." Voluspa, 64. 

13. Vendidad, 1.3. 


Narayana, who was regarded as "the light” or as "he in whom a great fire shines, 
radiating in every direction.” The Thule mentioned by the Greeks was characterized 
as the "Land of the Sun.” Someone said: “Thule ultima a sole nomen habeas.” Though 
the etymology of the word Thule is obscure and uncertain, it still signifies the idea 
the ancients had concerning this divine region and it points to the solar character 
of the "ancient Tlappa I Ian,” Tullan, or Tula (a contraction of tonalan= “the place of 
the Sun”), the original homeland of the Toltecs and the "paradise” of their heroes; it 
also points to the home of the Hyperboreans, since according to the sacred geogra¬ 
phy of ancient traditions, the Hyperboreans were a mysterious race that lived in an 
eternal light and whose region was believed to be the dwelling place and the home¬ 
land of the Delphic Apollo, who was the Doric god of light ((poifioq anoXXov , the 
"Pure and the Radiant One”), who was also represented as a "golden” god and as a 
god of the Golden Age . 14 There were stocks like the Boreads that were simulta¬ 
neously priestly and kingly and who derived their dignity from the Apollonian land 
of the Hyperboreans. IS Here too there are plenty of references that can be cited. 

Cycle of Being, solar cycle, cycle of light as glory, cycle of the living in an 
eminent and transcendent sense—these are the characteristics of the first age, the 
Golden Age, or the "era of the gods” found in the traditional memories. 


14. Callimachus, Hymn to Apollo, 34-35. 

15. Diodorus Siculus, Bibliotheca historian, 2.11. 


186 


187 



The Pole hod the Hypemi] ton 


24 


The Pole and the Hyperborean Region 


A t this time it is important to consider a peculiar characteristic of the primordial 
. age that allows us to associate with it very specific historical and geographi¬ 
cal representations. I have previously discussed the symbolism of the “pole.” This 
pole is either represented as an island or as terra firm a and symbolizes spiritual 
stability (the seat of transcendent beings, heroes, and immortals) opposed to the 
contingency of the “waters"; or as a mountain or “elevated place" usually associated 
with Olympian meanings. In ancient traditions both of these representations were 
often associated with the “polar" symbolism that was applied to the supreme center 
of the world and thus to the archetype of any kind of regere in the supreme sense of 
the word . 1 

In addition to the symbol of the pole, there are some recurrent and very specific 
traditional data that indicate the North as the site of an island, terra firma, or moun¬ 
tain, the meaning of which is often confused with the location of the first era; in other 
words, we are confronted by a motif that simultaneously has a spiritual and a real 
meaning, pointing back to a time when the symbol was reality and the reality a 
symbol and history and metahistory were not two separated parts but rather two 
parts reflecting each other. This is precisely the point in which it is possible to enter 
into the events conditioned by time. Allegedly, according to tradition, in an epoch of 
remote prehistory that corresponds to the Golden Age or Age of Being, the symbolical 
island or “polar" land was a real location situated in the Arctic, in the area that today 
corresponds to the North Pole. This region was inhabited by beings who by virtue of 
their possession of that nonhuman spirituality (characterized by gold, “glory," light, 
and life) that in later times will be evoked by the abovementioned symbolism, founded 
the race that exemplified the Uranian tradition in a pure state; this race, in turn, was 

1. R. Gu6non, Le Roi du monde, chaps. 3, 4.1 he idea of a magnetic “polar” mountain, often located on an 
island, can be found in different forms and adaptations in Chinese, medieval Nordic, and Islamic legends. 
See E. Taylor, Primitive Culture (London, 1920). 


the central and most direct source of the various forms and manifestations this tradi¬ 
tion produced in other races and civilizations . 2 

The memory of this Arctic seat is the heritage of the traditions of many people, 
both in the form of real geographical references and in symbols of its function and its 
original meaning; these symbols were often elevated to a superhistorical plane, in 
other words they were applied to other centers that were capable of being consid¬ 
ered as replicas of the former. For this reason there is often a confusion of memories, 
names, myths, and locations, but a trained eye will easily detect the single compo¬ 
nents. It is noteworthy to emphasize the interference of the Arctic theme with the 
Atlantic theme, of the mystery of the North with the mystery of the West, since the 
latter succeeded the original traditional pole as the main seat. We know that owing 
to an astrophysical cause, that is, to the tilting of the terrestrial axis, in every era 
there has been a change in climate. According to tradition, this inclination occurred 
at the specific moment in which the syntony of a physical and a metaphysical event 
occurred, as if to represent a state of disorder in the natural world that reflected an 
event of a spiritual nature. When Lieh-tzu described the myth of the giant Kung- 
Kung who shatters the “column of heaven,” he was probably referring to such an 
event. In this Chinese tradition we also find other concrete references, such as the 
following one, though it is mixed together with details that describe later cataclysms: 

The pillars of heaven were shattered. The earth shook at its founda¬ 
tions. The northern skies descended lower and lower. The sun, the moon 
and the stars changed their course [their course appeared changed as a 
result of the tilting of the terrestrial axis]. The earth’s surface cracked 
and the waters contained in its belly gushed forward and inundated 
various countries. Man was in a state of rebellion against Heaven and 
the universe fell victim to chaos. The sun darkened. The planets changed 
their course [because of the abovementioned shift in perspective] and 
the great harmony of heaven was destroyed . 3 

In any event, the freezing and the long night descended at a specific time on the 
polar region. Thus, when the forced migration from this seat ensued, the first cycle 
came to an end and a new cycle—the Atlantic cycle—began. 

2. The hypothesis of an austral rather than a boreal origin can be ascribed to the traditions concerning Lemuria, 
which, however, is connected to a cycle so ancient that it cannot be adequately considered in this context. 
[For an interesting discussion of this theme see J. Godwin, Arktos: The Polar Myth in Science , Symbolism 
and Nazi Survival (Grand Rapids, Mich., 1993).] 

3. Lieh-tzu, 5. Plato himself associated mythical catastrophes such as the one caused by Phaethon with a 
“change in the course of the stars,” that is, with the different appearance of the heavenly vault, that re¬ 
sulted from the shift of the terrestrial axis. 


188 


189 




Genesis hud Face of the Titan UJorld 


The Pole rod the TtaBom Regioii 


Aryan texts from India, such as the Vedas and the Mahabharata preserve the 
memory of the Arctic seat through astronomical and calendar-related allusions that 
cannot be understood other than through an actual reference to such a seat ." 1 In the 
Hindu tradition the term clvTpa , which means “insular continent,’’ is often used to 
designate different cycles by virtue of a spatial transposition of a temporal notion 
(cycle = island). Now, in the doctrine of the dvTpa we find meaningful recollections 
of the Arctic seat, even though they are mixed with other things. The above men¬ 
tioned Sveta-dvTpa (“Island of Splendor”) was situated in the Far North; the Uttara- 
Kuru are often mentioned as an original Northern race that originated from Jambu- 
dvlpa, the “polar” insular continent that is the first of the various dvTpa and, at the 
same time, the center of them all. Its memory is mixed with the memory of the 
Saka-dvTpa, located in the “white sea” or “milky sea,” namely, the Arctic Sea. In 
this place no deviation from the law from above occurred. According to the Karma 
Parana, the seat of the solar Visnu, symbolized by the “polar cross” (the hooked 
cross or swastika), coincides witli the Sveta-dvTpa that the Padma Parana claims to 
be the homeland, located beyond anything connected with samsaric fear and fret, of 
the great ascetics, the mahSyogi, and the “children of Brahman” (the equivalent of 
the “transcendent beings” who inhabited the northern regions, according to the Chi¬ 
nese tradition); these “great souls” live by Hari, who is Vi$nu himself, represented 
as “blond” and “golden” and living by a symbolic throne “upheld by lions, which 
shines like the sun and radiates like fire.” These are variations on the theme of the 
“Land of the Sun.” As a reflection of this, on a doctrinal plane the deva-ySna, which 
is the way leading to solar immortality and to superindividual states of being—as 
opposed to the way or a return to the mani or to the Mothers—was called the “Way 
of the North”: in Sanskrit, north (uttara) also means “the most elevated, or supreme 
region.” Also, uttara-yana (northern path) is the “ascending” path followed by the 
sun between the winter and summer solstices . 4 5 Among the Aryans from Iran we find 
more precise memories. Their original seat (Ariyana Vaego), created by the god of 
light and in which the “glory” dwells and where the king Yima allegedly met Ahura 
Mazda, was a land situated in the Far North. The tradition of the Zend-Avesta re¬ 
lates that Yima was warned in advance of the approaching of “fatal winters ” 6 and 
that the “serpent of winter,” the pet of the god of darkness, Angra Mainyu, came 

4. G. B. Ttlak, The Arctic Home in the Vedas: Being Also a New Key to the Interpretation of Many Vedic 
Texts and Legends (Poona, 1903). 

5. In a Hindu rite (anjali), the homage paid to traditional texts is performed while facing north (The Laws of 
Ma/iu 2.70), as if in memory of the place of origin of the transcendent wisdom contained in them. In Tibet, 
the north is believed to he the origin of a very ancient spiritual tradition, of which the magical formulas of 
the indigenous Bon religion allegedly are the degenerated residues. 

6. Vendidad, 2.20. 


upon Ariyana Vaego; then “there were ten months of winter and two of summer,” 
and “it was cold in the waters, on the earth, and frost covered the vegetation .” 7 Ten 
months of winter and two months of summer: this is the climate of the Arctic regions. 

The Nordic-Scandinavian tradition, notwithstanding its fragmentary nature, 
offers various testimonies that are often mixed together in a confused way. It is 
possible, however, to find analogous testimonies. The Asgard, the primordial golden 
seat of the Aesir, was located by those traditions in the Mitgard, which was the 
“Land in the Middle.” This mythical land was in turn identified both with Gardarike, 
which is a semi-Arctic region, and with the “Green Island” or “Green Land,” which, 
though portrayed in ancient cosmology as the first land to arise from the abyss 
Ginnungagap, is likely to be related with Greenland itself. Greenland, as the name 
itself suggests, seems to have had a rich vegetation and to have been unaffected by 
the Ice Age up to the time of the Goths. In the early Middle Ages we still find the 
idea that the northern regions were the original birthplace of all races and people . 8 
Moreover, in the Eddie tales describing the struggle of the gods against destiny (rok), 
an eschatological struggle that they believed was going to affect their own home¬ 
land, it is possible to recognize some data that refer to the end of the first cycle; in 
these tales reminiscences of past events are mixed with apocalyptical themes. Here, 
just like in the Vendidad, we find the theme of a terrible winter. The breaking out of 
the natural elements was coupled with the dimming of the sun. According to the 
Gylt'uginning: “First of all a winter will come called fimbul-winter [mighty ormyste- 
rious winter]. Then snow will drift from all directions. There will be great frosts and 
keen winds .” 6 

In the Chinese tradition the country of “transcendent men” and the country of a 
“race of beings with soft bones” are often identified with the northern region: an 
emperor of the First Dynasty was thought to have resided in a country located north 
of the Northern Sea, in a boundless region spared by inclement weather and en¬ 
dowed with a symbolic mountain (Hu-Ling) and a water spring. This country was 
called “Far North”; Mu, another imperial type, was said to have been brokenhearted 
upon leaving it . 10 Analogously, Tibet retains the memory of Tshang Shambhala, the 
mystical “northern city,” or city of “peace,” also thought to be the island on which the 

7. Ibid., 1.3-4. 

8. Jordanes, Historia Gotorum: “Sandza insula quasi officina gentium ant certe velut nationum.” 

9. Gylfaginning, 51. The Eddie representation of the North as Niflheim, the “world of mist and darkness,” 
inhabited by giants and by frost, was most likely developed in a later period by slocks that had already 
migrated to the South; likewise, the frozen Ariyana Vaego was regarded as the seal of the dark forces of 
the evil creation of Angra Mainyu, who personally came from the North to fight against Zarathustra, 
Vendidad, 19.1. 

10. Lieh-tzu,5 , 


190 


J 91 


Gcntsis mid Face of tiff Modemi UUorld 


The Pole mid the HypcRBOREnn REGion 


hero Gesar was said to have been “bom” (just like Zarathustra was bom in the 
Ariyana Vaego). The masters of Tibetan traditions say that the "northern paths” lead 
the yogin to the great liberation. 

The recurrent tradition concerning the origins that is found in North America, 
from the Pacific to the region of the Great Lakes, mentions the sacred land of the 
"Far North,” situated by the "great waters,” whence allegedly came the ancestors of 
the Nahuatlans, the Toltecs, and the Aztecs. I previously mentioned that the name of 
this land, Aztlan, just like the Hindu Sveta-dvlpa, denotes the idea of whiteness, or 
of white land. In the northern traditions there is the memory of a land inhabited by 
Gaelic races and situated by the Gulf of St. Lawrence called "Great Ireland” or 
Hvitramamaland, which means "homeland of white people”; the names Wabanaki 
and Abenaki found among the inhabitants of those regions derive from the word 
wabeya, which means "white,” 

Furthermore, some legends of central America mention four primordial ances¬ 
tors of the Quiche race who are trying to return to Tulla, the region of light. When 
they get there they only find ice; also, the sun seldom appears. Then they scatter and 
move to the country of the Quiche. 11 This Tula or Tullan was the original homeland 
of the Toltecs’ forefathers, who probably derived their tribal name from it and who 
eventually called "Tula” the center of the empire they established on the Mexican 
plateau. This Tula was also conceived as the "Land of the Sun” and was sometimes 
located east of North America, in the Atlantic; but this is probably due to the inter¬ 
ference of the memory of a later location that was destined to peipetuate for some 
time the function of the primordial Tula (to which Aztlan probably corresponds) 
when the glacial weather descended upon it and when the sun disappeared; 12 the 
name Tula, which visibly corresponds to the Greeks’ Thule, was also applied to 
other regions. 

According to Greco-Roman traditions, Thule lay in the sea that derives its name 
from the god of the Golden Age, namely, the Cronium Sea, which corresponds to the 


1 I. The four Quiche ancestors probably correspond to the Celtic idea of the “Island of the Four Lords,” and to 
the Chinese idea of the faraway Ku-she island, inhabited by transcendent men and by four lords (R. 
Guenon, Le Roi du nionrfe, 71-72). Guenon recalled the division of ancient Ireland into four kingdoms 
that allegedly reproduced the division proper of “a land situated farther North, today unknown and maybe 
gone forever” and the repeated occurrence in Ireland of the symbol of the “center” or “pole,” which the 
Greeks called omphalos, I will add that the black Stone of Destiny, which designated legitimate kings and 
which was one of the mystical objects brought to Ireland by the race of the Tuatha de Dana an, who 
themselves came from an Atlantic or North Atlantic land, had the same value as a regal “polar” symbol 
in the double meaning of the word. 

12. Guenon, in his Le Roi du monde (ch. 10), made some astute observations on the relationship that tradi¬ 
tionally existed between Thule and the figurations of the Big Dipper, which is connected with the polar 
symbolism. 


northern region of the Atlantic; 1 ^ a similar location was ascribed in later traditions to 
what became symbol and metahistory in the form of the Happy Islands, or the Is¬ 
lands of the Immortals, 14 or the Lost Island. This island, as Honorius Augustadumensis 
wrote, "is hidden from people’s sight; sometimes it is discovered by chance, but 
when it is actively sought after, it cannot be found.” Thule is confused with both the 
legendary Hyperborean homeland, situated in the Far North 15 and from which the 
original Achaean stocks brought the Delphic Apollo, and with the isle of Ogygia, 
“the sea’s navel” located far away in the vast ocean. 16 Plutarch situated this island 
north of Great Britain and claimed that it was in proximity of the Arctic region where 
Kronos, the god of the golden region, is still asleep; in this location the sun sets only 
for one hour each day, and even then the darkness is not all-enveloping but looks 
more like a twilight, just li ke in the Arctic regions. 17 The confused notion of the bright 
northern night became the foundation of the notion of the land of the Hyperboreans 
as a place of perennial light, free of darkness. This representation and this memory 
were so vivid that an echo of it lasted until the end of the Roman civilization. After 
the primordial land was identified with Great Britain, it is said that the Constantins 
Chlorus (reigned a.d. 305—306) went there with his legions not so much to pursue 
trophies and military victories, but rather in order to visit the land that is "most sacred 
and closest to heaven”; to be able to contemplate the father of the gods (Kronos); 
and to enjoy a "day without a night,” in other words to be able to anticipate the 
possession of the eternal light that is typical of imperial apotheosis. 18 Even when the 
Golden Age was projected into the future as the hope of a new saeculum, we can still 
find references to Nordic symbolism. According to Lactantius, 19 the mighty prince 
who will reestablish justice after the tall of Rome will come from the north (ab extremis 
fmibusplagae septemtrionalis); the mystical and invincible Tibetan hero Gesar, who 
will reestablish a kingdom of justice and exterminate the usurpers, is expected to be 

13. Pliny, Historia nuturalis . 4.30. 

14. According to Strabo (Geographia, 1.6.2), Thule was six days of navigation, north of (Great) Britain. 

13. Callimachus, Hymn to Apollo, 4.28 I; Pliny, 4.89. Around the fourth century n.c., Heeateus of Abdera said 
that Great Britain was inhabited by “Hyperboreans,” who arc identified with the proto-Celts; these people 
were credited with erecting the prehistoric temple of Stonehenge. 

16. Odyssey, 1.50; 12.244. Here too, because of the connections with Zeus’s and the Hesperides’ garden, 
there arc several obvious interpolations with the memory of the later Atlantic seat. 

17. Plutarch, De facie in orbe lunae, 26. Plutarch says that beyond other islands, further north, there the seat 
still exists in which Kronos, the god of the Golden Age, sleeps on a rock that shines like gold and where 
birds bring him ambrosia. 

18. It is possible that Ogygia, composed of the Gaelic roots og (“young” and “sacred”) and ing (“island”), 
refers to the “Sacred Land of Youth,” to the Tir na mBco, the “Land of the Living” spoken of in Nordic 
legends, which in turn corresponds to Avalon, the original seat of the Tuatha d6 Danaan. 

19. The Divine Institutes, 7.16.3. These emergences continue in the later mystical and hermetic literature. 
Besides Boehme, G. Postel in his Compendium cosmographicum says that “heaven” (a mystical and 
theological transposition of the primordial homeland) is found underneath the North Pole. 


192 


193 



Genesis mid Face of the IHodem UJorld 


“reborn” in the north; Shambhala, the sacred northern city, will be the birth place of 
KaLki-avatara, the one who will put an end to the Dark Age; the Hyperborean Apollo, 
according to Virgil, will inaugurate a new golden and heroic age in the sign of Rome; 20 
and so on. 

After stating these essential points, I will not make further references to the law 
that connects physical and spiritual causes as it is applied to a plane upon which, 
between what may be characterized as a “fall” (the deviation of an absolutely pri¬ 
mordial race) and the physical tilting of the terrestrial axis (which determined radi¬ 
cal changes in climate and periodical natural disasters affecting entire continents), it 
is possible to have a foreboding of an intimate connection. I will only point out that 
ever since the polar seat became deserted it is possible to verify that progressive 
alteration and loss of the original tradition that will eventually lead to the Iron Age, 
or Dark Age, or Kali Yuga, or “era of the wolf” (Edda) and, strictly speaking, to 
modem times. 


20. Virgil, Eclogues, 4.5-10. 


194 


25 



The Northern-Atlantic Cycle 


A s far as the migration of the Northern primordial race is concerned, it is 
necessary to distinguish two great waves, the first moving from north to south, 
the second from west to east. Groups of Hyperboreans carrying the same spirit, the 
same blood, and the same body of symbols, signs, and languages first reached North 
America and the northern regions of the Eurasian continent. Supposedly, tens of 
thousands of years later a second great migratory wave ventured as far as Central 
America, reaching a land situated in the Atlantic region that is now lost, thereby 
establishing a new center modeled after the polar regions. This land may have been 
that Atlantis described by Plato and Diodorus; the migration and the reestablishment 
of a center help to explain the transpositions of names, symbols, and topographies 
that I have discussed in reference to the first two ages. In regard to this, it is fitting to 
talk about a Northern-Atlantic people and civilization. 

From this Atlantic seat the races of the second cycle spread to the American 
(hence the previously mentioned memories of the Nahuatlans, Toltecs, and Aztecs 
concerning their original homeland), European, and African continents. Most likely 
these races reached the borders of western Europe in the early Paleolithic. These 
races supposedly corresponded to, among others, the Tuatha dd Danaan, the divine 
stock that came to Ireland from Avalon and who were led by Ogma Grian-aineach, 
the hero with a “sunny countenance,” whose counterpart is the white and solar 
Quetzalcoatl, who came with his companions to America from the “Land situated 
beyond the Waters.” Anthropologically speaking, these races correspond to Cro- 
Magnon man, who made his appearance toward the end of the glacial age in the 
western part of Europe (especially in the area of the French Cantabric civilization of 
Abri La Madeleine, Gourdain, and Altamira); Cro-Magnon man was clearly supe¬ 
rior, both culturally and biologically, to the aboriginal Mousterian man of the Ice 
Age, so much so that somebody recently nicknamed the Cro-Magnon “the Greeks of 
the Paleolithic.” As far as their origin is concerned, the similarity between their civi¬ 
lization and the civilization of the Hyperborean, which is found even in the vestiges 


195 



Genesis mid Face of the ffloDERn QJorld 


The noRTHERn-flTLflniic CycLE 


of the people of the Far North (civilization of the reindeer), is very significant. Among 
other prehistoric traces of the same cycle are those found on the Baltic and Frisian- 
Saxon shores; in the Doggerland, in a region that has partly disappeared—the leg¬ 
endary Vineta—a center of this civilization was eventually established. Besides Spain, 
other migratory waves landed on West African shores; 1 later on, between the Pale¬ 
olithic and the Neolithic and probably in conjunction with races of direct Northern 
descent, other people moved through the continents from northwest to southeast to¬ 
ward Asia, into the area many believe to be the cradle of the Indo-European race, 
and then further on, all the way to China; 2 other waves followed the North African 
shoreline all the way to Egypt or went by sea from the Balearic Islands to Sardinia 
and to the prehistoric sites in the Aegean Sea. More particularly, in Europe and in 
the Near East, the origin of the megalithic civilization of the dolmen and the so- 
called battle-axe people, which remains as enigmatic as that of Cro-Magnon, is very 
similar. This migration occurred in separate waves, through fluxes and refluxes, in¬ 
terbreeding, and conflicts with aboriginal or already mixed races. Thus, from north 
to south and from west to east, through diffusion, adaptation, or domination there 
arose civilizations that originally shared, to a certain degree, the same matrix, and 
often strains of the same spiritual legacy found in the conquering elites. Encounters 
with inferior races, which were enslaved to the chthonic cult of demons and mixed 
with the animal nature, generated memories of struggles that were eventually ex¬ 
pressed in mythologized forms that always underline the contrast between a bright, 
divine type (an element of Northern origins) and a dark, demonic type. Through the 
institution of traditional societies by the conquering races a hierarchy was estab¬ 
lished that carried a spiritual, ethnic, and racial value; in India, in Iran, in Egypt, 
and even in Peru we find rather evident traces of this in the institution of the caste 
system. 

I have said that originally the Atlantic center was supposed to reproduce the 
polar function of the Hyperborean seat and that this second center occasioned 
frequent confusion in traditions and in memories. This confusion should not prevent 
us from detecting in a later period, yet still falling within remote prehistory, a trans¬ 
formation of civilization and spirituality and a differentiation leading from the first to 
the second era (from the Golden Age to the Silver Age) that eventually prepared the 
way for the third era, the Bronze Age or Titanic Age; this age should be character¬ 

1. This is the legendary kingdom of Uphaz and, in part, the prehistoric African civilization as it was imagined 
by Frobenius; by confusing the partial center with the original seat of which Uphaz was probably a colony, 
he identified it with the seat of the Platonic Atlantis. See L. Frobenius, Die atiantischc Gotterlehre (Jena 
1926). 

2. In China there have been recent discoveries of the vestiges of a great prehistoric civilization, similar to the 

Egyptian-Minoan, which was likely created by these migratory waves. 


ized as the “Age of Atlantis,” considering that the Hellenic tradition regarded Atlas 
as related to the Titans by virtue of being Prometheus’s brother. 3 

Anthropologically speaking, we must consider a first major group that became 
differentiated through idio-variation, or variation without mixing: this group was 
mainly composed of the migratory waves of a more immediate Arctic derivation and 
it made its last appearance in the various strains of the pure Aryan race. A second 
large group became differentiated through miscegenation with the aboriginal South¬ 
ern races, with proto-Mongoloid and Negroid races, and with other races that prob¬ 
ably represented the degenerated residues of the inhabitants of a second prehistoric 
continent, now lost, which was located in the South, and which some designated as 
Lemuria. 4 The second group includes the red-skinned race of the last inhabitants of 
Atlantis (according to Plato’s mythical account, those who forfeited their pristine 
“divine” nature because of repeated unions with the human race); these people should 
be regarded as the original ethnic stock of several newer civilizations established by 
the migratory waves from west to east (the red race of Cretan-Aegeans, Eteicretes, 
Pelasgians, Lycians, Egyptians, Kefti, etc.), 5 and of the American civilizations. These 
latter people in their myths remembered the country of origin of their ancestors who 
had come from the divine Atlantic land “situated on the great waters.” The name 
Phoenicians means “the Red Ones,” and most likely it is another memory of the first 
Atlantic navigators of the Neolithic Mediterranean. 

Two components must be considered both from an anthropological and from a 
spiritual point of view (the Northern and the Atlantic components) in the vast mate¬ 
rial concerning traditions and institutions found in this second cycle. The first compo¬ 
nent is immediately related to the Light of the North, and it retained for the most part 
the original Uranian and “polar” orientation; the second component reveals the trans¬ 
formation that occurred as a result of the contacts established with the Southern 
populations. Before considering the meaning of such a transformation, which consti¬ 
tutes the first alteration or, so to speak, the inner counterpart of the loss of the polar 
residence, it is necessary to emphasize another point. 

Almost every people retains the memory of a catastrophe that ended the previ¬ 
ous cycle of mankind. The myth of the Flood is the most frequent form employed to 

3. While on the one hand the legend of Atlas holding the world on his shoulders depicts the sentence of the 
Titan Atlas, who according to some (Servius, Aci Aeneidem, 4.247) participated in the conflict against the 
Olympian gods, on the other hand it may represent a symbol indicating the function of “pole,” support, and 
spiritual axis the Atlanteans inherited from the Hyperboreans. In his exegesis, the Christian theologian 
and Church father Clement of Alexandria wrote: “Adas is an impassible pole; it may even be an immobile 
sphere, and maybe, in the best of cases, it alludes to the state of unmoved immortality.” 

4. See the works of H. Wirth for the attempt to utilize the researches on blood types in order to define the two 
races that emerged from the original stock, 

5. A. Mosso, Le origini della civilita ' meditermnen (Milan, 1910). 


196 


197 



Genesis mid Face qp the UloDERn World 


The noRiHERn-fliLfinTic Chcle 


describe this memory; it is shared by many people: from the Persians and Mexicans 
to the Mayas, from the Chaldeans and Greeks to the Hindus and to the people who 
inhabited the Atlantic-African coastline, to the Celts and to the Scandinavian people. 
Moreover, its original content is a historical event; according to the tale of Plato and 
Diodorus it essentially represented the end of an Atlantic land. The center of the 
Atlantic civilization, to which its colonies were subordinated for a long time, sank 
into the sea in an era that by far predates the time that according to Hindu tradition, 
inaugurated the Dark Age; according to some traces of chronology built into the 
myth, this is what indeed happened. The historical memory of that center gradually 
disappeared in the civilizations that derived from it but in which elements of the 
ancient heritage were retained in the blood of the dominating castes, the roots of 
various languages, and also in social institutions, signs, rituals, and hierograms. In 
the Hebrew tradition, the theme of the tower of Babel, with the ensuing punishment 
represented by the “confusion of the various languages” (Gen. 11:7), may refer to 
the period in which the unitary tradition was lost and the various forms of civilization 
were dissociated from their common origin and could no longer understand each 
other after the catastrophe of the Flood ended the cycle of Atlantic mankind. The 
historical memory was often preserved in myth, that is, in metahistory. The West, in 
which Atlantis was located during its original cycle (when it reproduced and per¬ 
petuated the much older “polar” function), very often represented a nostalgic refer¬ 
ence point for the fallen ones. By virtue of a transposition onto a different plane, the 
waters that submerged the Atlantic land were called “waters of death,” which the 
following postdiluvian generations, consisting entirely of mortal beings, must cross 
through initiation in order to be reintegrated with the divine state of the “dead,” 
namely, with the lost race. On this basis, the well-known figurations of the “Island of 
the Dead” could be understood in a similar sense as transformations of the memory 
of the sunken insular continent, 6 The mystery of paradise and of places of immortal¬ 
ity in general was reconnected with the mystery of the West (and in some instances, 
of the North too), and thus it formed a body of traditional teachings the same way the 
theme of “Those Who Are Rescued from the Waters” and of “Those Who Do Not 
Drown In the Waters” 7 shifted from the real, historical sense (that referred to the 

6. See D, Merezhkovsky, Das Geheimnis des Westens (Leipzig and Zurich, 1929), in which there are several 
valid references to what the rituals and the symbols of the Atlnnteans might have been. 

7. See for instance Yama, Yima, Noah, Deucalion, Shamashnapishtim, Romulus, the solar hero Kama in the 

epic Mahabhfirhata, and so on. Just as Manu, son ot Vivasvat, the heir of the solar tradition who survived 

the Flood and created die laws of a new cycle (The Laws of Manu) had for a brother Yama (compare with 

the Iranian Yima, the solar king who escaped the Flood too), who was “the god of the dead'’; likewise 
Minos, whose name corresponds etymologically to Manu, often appears as the countei^art of Radamant, 

who is the king of the “Island of the Blessed” or of the “Fleroes.” 


elites who escaped the catastrophe and went on to establish new traditional centers) 
to a symbolic meaning and appeared in the legends of prophets, heroes, and ini¬ 
tiates. Generally speaking, the symbols proper to that primordial race surface again 
in enigmatic ways until relatively recent times, wherever traditional conquering kings 
and dynasties made their appearance. 

Moreover, the Greeks often discussed the exact spot of the divine garden (6a .Sv 
KTjTtoq), which was the original dwelling of the Olympian god Zeus, 8 and of the 
Garden of the Hesperides, “beyond the river Ocean”; according to some, the 
Hesperides were the daughters of Atlas, the king of the Western Island. It was pre¬ 
cisely this garden that Heracles was supposed to find in that symbolic feat that has 
often been associated with his winning Olympian immortality, and having had Atlas 
as a guide, who alone “knows the dark depths of the sea.” 9 Generally speaking, the 
Hellenic equivalent of the Northern, solar way or of the Indo-Aryan deva-yana, was 
a western path or “Zeus’s way,” which led from the fortress of Kronos, located in the 
Island of the Heroes on the faraway sea, to the peaks of Mount Olympus. 10 Accord¬ 
ing to the Chaldean tradition, it is in the West, “beyond the deep waters of death, 
which have no ford and which have not been crossed for the longest time” that the 
divine garden is to be found, in which the king Shamashnapishtim, the hero who 
escaped the Flood and who still retains the privilege of immortality, still reigns; this 
garden was reached by Gilgamesh who followed the western path of the sun in order 
to receive the gift of life. 11 

It is significant that the Egyptian civilization did not have a “barbaric” prehis¬ 
tory: it arose all of a sudden, so to speak, enjoying from the start a high level of 
sophistication. According to tradition, the first Egyptian dynasties were formed by a 
race that had come from the West, also known as the race of “Horus’s companions” 
(shemsu Hew), or of those marked by the “sign of the First among the inhabitants of 
the western land,” namely, Osiris. Osiris himself was believed to be the eternal king 
on “Yalu’s Fields,” in the “land of the sacred Amentet,” beyond the “waters of death,” 
which was thought to exist “in the far West,” and which sometimes has been associ¬ 
ated with the idea of a great insular land. The Egyptian funerary rite carried on the 
symbolism and the ancient memory: in this rite the ritual formula was “To the West! ” 

8. According to some (Piganiol, Les Origines de Rome [Paris, 1899]) the appearance of the Olympian gods 
next to the feminine deities of the earth was the result of the mixture of the cults of northern origin with 
the cults of southern origin. 

9. Hesiod, Theogony, 215. 

10. W. Ridgeway, The Early Age of Greece (Cambridge, 1901), correctly pointed out that the belief in west¬ 
ern dwellings of immortality was typical of those people who used the essentially Northem-Arynn ritual 
of cremation and not merely of burial. 

11. Gilgamesh, 10.65-77; 11.296-98. 


198 


199 


Genesis and Face of the FHoderh World 


The noRTHERn-fliiMic CyciE 


and it included the crossing oi the waters and a procession carrying the “sacred ark 
of the sun,” that is, the ark of those who had been “rescued from the waters.” 12 
Moreover, the Chinese and Tibetan traditions mention the existence of a “western 
paiadise with tiees beaiing golden fruits, like the Hesperides’ garden. There is also 
a frequent image of Mi-tu with a rope and the inscription: “He who draws [the souls] 
to the West. 13 On the other hand, the memory that was transformed into the myth of 
paradise is also found in Celtic and Gaelic sagas concerning the “Land of the Liv- 
ing, the Magh-Mell (‘The Pleasant Plain”), or Avalon, which were otherworldy 
regions located in western lands. Avalon was believed to be the place in which the 
survivots of the race from above,” of the Tuatha de Danaan, King Arthur himself, 
legendary heroes such as Conall, Oisin, Cuchulainn, Loegaire, Ogier the Dane, and 
others came to enjoy eternal life. 14 This mysterious Avalon is the equivalent of the 
Atlantic “paradise” described in American legends; it is the ancient Tlapallan or 
Tull an, it is the Land of the Sun, or the “Red Land” to which both the white god 
Quetza Icoatl and legendary heroes such as the Toltec priest Huemac (“Great Hand”) 
mentioned in the Codex Chimalpopoca, returned, as did the Tuatha to Avalon, thus 
disappearing from people’s sight. According to Jewish folklore, Enoch went to a 
western place, “to the far end of the earth,” in which there are symbolical mountains 
and divine trees guarded by the archangel Michael; these trees give life and salva¬ 
tion to the elect but are barred to mere mortals until the time of the Last Judgment. 15 
The last echoes of this myth were kept secret until the Christian Middle Ages; the 
navigator monks of the monasteries of Saint Matthias and of Saint Albaeus alleg¬ 
edly found in a mysterious Atlantic land a golden city, which was believed to be the 
dwelling place of Enoch and Elijah, the prophets “who never died.” 

On the other hand, in the myth of the Flood the disappearance of the sacred land 
separated from continental land by a mare tenebrosum —the “Waters of Death”— 
may also assume a meaning that connects it to the symbolism of the “ark,” to the 
preservation of the germs of the Living”—the “Living” in an eminent and figura- 


12. Just as among the Hellenes the localization of the dwelling of the immortals alternated between the North 
and the West, likewise in some ancient Egyptian traditions the Fields of Peace and the Land of Triumph 
that the deified soul of the deceased reached by first going through an existing passage in the “mountain/' 
were also thought to be located in the North. 

13. See Lieh-tzu Q) concerning the journey to the West made by the emperor Mu. who reached the “moun¬ 
tain” (Kuen-Lun) and met Si Wang Mu, the “Mother-Queen of the West.” 

14. Alan of Lille (Prophena anghcana Merlini) compared the place where King Arthur disappeared with that 
in which Elijah and Enoch disappeared and from which they will return one day. In regard to the land of 
the Hyperboreans, classical antiquity believed in the existence of beings (often kings such as Kroisos) 
who were taken there by Apollo, 

15. Enoch, 24.1-6; 25.4—6. 


five sense; 16 the disappearance of the legendary sacred land may also signify the 
passage of the center, which retains in an unadulterated way the primordial nonhu¬ 
man spirituality, into the invisible, the occult, or the unmanifested. Hence, according 
to Hesiod, the beings of the first age, “who never died,” would continue to exist as 
humankind’s “invisible” guardians. Thus, the legend of the subterranean people or 
of the subterranean kingdom 17 is often the counterpart of the legend of the sunken 
land, island, or city; this legend is found among several populations. 18 When impiety 
began to run rampant on the earth, the survivors of previous eras moved to an “un¬ 
derground” location (in other words, they acquired an “invisible” existence) that is 
often situated in the mountains as a result of transpositions with the symbolism of the 
“heights.” 14 These beings continue to exist on those mountain peaks until a new 
manifestation is made possible for them as the end of the cycle of decadence ap¬ 
proaches. Pindar said that the road leading to the Hyperboreans can be found “nei¬ 
ther by ship nor by marching feet,” 20 and that only heroes such as Perseus and Heracles 
were admitted to it. Montezuma, the last Mexican emperor, may enter Aztlan only 
after performing magical operations and undergoing a transformation of his physical 
body. Plutarch relates that the inhabitants of Northern regions could commune with 
Kronos (the king of the Golden Age) and with the inhabitants of the Far Northern 
region 21 only in their sleep. According to Lieh-tzu (2), those marvelous regions he 
mentions that are connected to the Arctic and the Atlantic seat, “you cannot reach by 
boat or carriage or on foot, only by a journey of the spirit.” 22 According to the Tibetan 
lamas’ teachings, Shambhala, the mystical Northern seat, is within everyone. This is 
how the testimonies concerning what once was a real location inhabited by nonhu¬ 
man beings survived and assumed a metahistorical value, providing at the same 


16. In the Chaldean redaction of the myth, the gods ordered Atrachasis to rescue the sacred writings of the 
previous era from the flood by “burying them": they were conceived as the “residual seeds” from which 
everything else will grow again. 

17. According to the Iranian tradition, King Yima built a refuge (vnnt), which is often portrayed ns “subterra¬ 
nean,” in order to save the seeds of all living things. Vcndidnd, 2.22. 

18. See R. Gu6non, Le Roi du monde, chaps. 7-8. 

19. In the Irish sagas some of the Tuatha, after their defeat by the Milesians, withdrew to the “western 
paradise” of Avalon, others chose underground dwellings beneatli mounds or hiLls (sidhe), hence the 
name Aes Sidhe, “the people of the hills.” According to a Mexican tradition, in the caves of ChapuLtepec 
lies the entrance to the subterranean world into which King Huemac II disappeared and from which he 
will emerge one day in order to rebuild his kingdom. 

20. Pindar, The Pythian Odes, 10.29. 

21. Plutarch, De facie in orbe lunae, 26. In antiquity sleep was believed to neutralize the physical senses and 
to awaken the inner senses, thus naturally creating the conditions for contacts with the invisible dimen¬ 
sion. 

22. The Book of Lieh-tzu, trans. A. C. Graham (New York, 1960), 34. 


200 


201 


Geiiesis id Face of the (Heidem LUorld 


time symbols of states beyond ordinary life, that can only be reached through initia¬ 
tion. Besides the symbol, we find the idea that the original center still exists in an 
occult and usually unreachable location (similar to what Catholic theology said about 
the Garden of Eden): only a change of state or of nature can open its doors to the 
generations living in the last ages. 

This is how the second great transposition of metaphysics and history was estab¬ 
lished. In reality, the symbol of the West, just like that of the ‘pole,” may acquire a 
universal value beyond all geographical and historical references. In the West, where 
the physical light that is subject to birth and to decline becomes extinguished, the 
unchanging spiritual light is kindled; there the journey of the “Sun’s ship” toward the 
Land of the Immortals commences. And since this region lies where the sun disap¬ 
pears beyond the horizon, it was also conceived as subterranean or as underwater. 
This is straightforward symbolism directly inspired by natural observations and thus 
used by various populations, even by those that have no relation with Atlantic memo¬ 
ries. This, however, does not mean that such a theme, situated within given limits 
determined by concomitant testimonies such as the ones I have presented, may not 
also have a historical character. What I mean is that among the countless forms 
assumed by the mystery of the West, a group may be isolated for which it is legiti¬ 
mate to assume that the origin of the symbol did not consist in the natural phenom¬ 
enon of the course of the sun, but rather, by virtue of a spiritual transposition, in the 
distant memory of the disappeared Western land. In this regard, the surprising corre¬ 
spondence between American and European myths, especially Nordic and Celtic 
ones, constitutes a very decisive proof. 

Secondly, 'the mystery of the West” always marks a particular stage in the 
history of the spirit that is no longer the primordial one; it corresponds to a type of 
spirituality that cannot be considered to be primordial and therefore it is defined by 
the mystery of transformation. It is characterized by a dualism and by a discontinu¬ 
ous passage: a light is kindled, another fades away. Transcendence has gone under¬ 
ground. Supemature, unlike the original state, is no longer nature: it is the goal of an 
initiation and the object of a problematic quest. Even when considered in its general 
aspect the mystery of the West appears to be typical of those more recent civiliza¬ 
tions, the varieties and destinies of which I will examine in the next chapter. It is 
connected to the solar symbolism rather than to the polar one; we have now entered 
the second phase of the primordial tradition. 


202 


26 



North and South 


I n the first part of this work I pointed out the relationship between the solar sym¬ 
bolism and several traditional civilizations; this symbolism naturally occurs in a 
number of traces, memories, and myths connected to the primordial civilization. When 
considering the Atlantic cycle, however, we can distinguish a typical alteration and 
differentiation of the polar symbolism from the symbolism relating to the previous 
Hyperborean civilization. The Hyperborean stage may be characterized as that in 
which the luminous principle presents the characteristics of immutability and of cen¬ 
tralism, which are, so to speak, typically “Olympian.” These are the same character¬ 
istics proper to the Hyperborean god Apollo, who unlike Helios, does not represent 
the sun following its patterns of ascent and of descent over the horizon, but is rather 
the sun itself, the dominating and unchanging source of light. The swastika and other 
forms of the prehistoric cross that are found approximately at the beginning of the 
glacial period (like the other very ancient prehistoric solar symbol of the circle with 
an inner center that was sometimes represented by the colossal dolmen), originally 
seem to have had a connection with this early form of spirituality. In fact, the swas¬ 
tika is a solar symbol inasmuch as it represents a rotary movement around a deter¬ 
mined and unmovable pivot corresponding to the center of another solar symbol, the 
circle. 1 There are different kinds of solar wheels and swastikas: circles, crosses, circles 
with crosses, and radiating circles; later on, there are axes with a swastika, double 
axes, and axes and other objects made with aeroliths arranged in a circular pattern; 
and then images of the “solar ship,” associated with the axes or with the Apollonian- 
Hyperborean swan and reindeer; all of these symbols are the traces of the original 
stage of the northern tradition. 

I. See R. Gu6non, Lc Roi du monde, chap. 2. From an analysis of tire geographical distribution of the swas¬ 
tika on the earth prepared by T. Wilson ( The Swastika: The Earliest Known Symbol in Annual Report of 
the Smithsonian Institution, 1896), while it seems that this sign was not proper only to the Indo-European 
races as it was supposed at first, nevertheless we find a distribution that largely corresponds to the North- 
em-Atlantic migrations to the west (America) and to the east (Europe). 


203 





Geiiesis hhd Face of the (Hoderu UUorld 


floRTH m South 


There is also a different spirituality connected to the polar symbolism, though it 
emphasizes the relationship with the year (the year-god) and thus with a law of 
mutation, ascent, descent, death, and rebirth. The original theme, therefore, is dis¬ 
tinct from what, may be characterized as a “Dionysian” phase; here we find the 
influences proper to another principle, another cult, another stock of races, and an¬ 
other geographical region. We notice a differentiating transposition. 

In order to classify this type of transposition we may consider the most signifi¬ 
cant point in time for the symbol of the sun as the “sun god,” the winter solstice. Here 
a new element acquires an ever greater relevance; it is that element into which the 
light seems to disappear and from which it seems to rise again, almost by virtue of 
renewed contact with the original principle animating its own life. This symbol does 
not appear in the traditions of pure boreal stock, and if it does, it appears only in a 
very subordinated way; conversely, in the southern civilizations and races this sym¬ 
bol is predominant and it often acquires a central meaning. It is the feminine, telluric 
symbol, which is portrayed as the Mother (the Divine Woman), the Earth, or the 
Waters (or Serpent); these three characteristic expressions are equivalent to a great 
degree and are often related to one another (Mother Earth; the generating Waters; 
the Serpent of the Waters). The relationship established between the two principles 
(the Mother and the Sun) is what gives meaning to two different redactions of the 
symbolism, the first of which still retains traces of the “polar” tradition, while the 
second chaiacteiizes a new cycle, namely, the Silver Age, and a mingling (which is 
already a degeneration) of North and South. 

Fiona an abstiact perspective, in those places in which solstices are celebrated 
there still is a connection with the “polar” symbolism (the vertical axis running from 
north to south), while the symbolism of the equinoxes is connected with the longitu¬ 
dinal (east-west) direction so much so that the predominance of either one of the two 
symbolisms in different civilizations, in and of itself, allows us to characterize what¬ 
ever in them refers to either the Hyperborean or Atlantic heritage. In what may be 
more properly characterized as an Atlantic tradition and civilization, however, we 
find a mixed form. Here, together with the presence of the solstice symbolism, we 
still have a “polar” element; but in the predominance of the theme of the solar god 
who changes, and in the appearance and ensuing predominance of the figure of the 
Mother or of similar symbols during the solstices, we may detect the effects of yet 
anothei influence and of another type of civilization and spirituality. 

Theietote, when the center consists of the solar male principle conceived of as 
life that arises and declines and that goes through winter and spring, or death and 
rebirth (as in the case of the so-called vegetation deities), while the identical and 
immutable principle is identified with the Universal Mother and with the Earth con¬ 
ceived as the eternal principle of every life, as the cosmic matrix and the inexhaust¬ 


ible source and seat of all energy—then we are truly confronted by a decadent civi¬ 
lization and by the second era, which is traditionally under the aegis of the water or 
of the moon. Conversely, wherever the sun continues to be conceived of in terms of 
uncreated and unprecedented pure light and “spiritual virility” following the lines of 
an Olympian meaning; and wherever people’s attention focuses on the luminous 
and heavenly nature of the fixed stars, since they appear to be exempt from the law 
of rising and setting, which in the opposite view affects the sun as the year-god 
himself—then what we are witnessing are instances of the highest, purest, and most 
ancient spirituality (the cycle of the Uranian civilizations). 

This is a very general and yet fundamental scheme. Generally speaking, we can 
distinguish between a Southern and a Northern Light; in the amount in which such an 
opposition has relatively well-defined traits within the mixed matter of what is his¬ 
torical and traceable back to very distant ages, it is possible to distinguish between a 
Uranian and a lunar spirituality, between “Arctic regions” and “Atlantis.” 

Historically and geographically, Atlantis does not correspond to the South, but 
to the West, The South corresponds to Lemuria, which I mentioned in passing, and 
some Negroid and Southern populations may be considered the last crepuscular rem¬ 
nants of this continent. Since until now, however, I have essentially followed the 
trajectory of the decline of the primordial Hyperborean civilization, I will discuss 
Atlantis only in reference to a phase of this decline; moreover, I will only consider 
the South in relation to the influence it exercised on primordial races and on North¬ 
ern civilizations during the Atlantic cycle (but not only in it, provided we do not give 
to this expression a general, typological meaning) or in relation to intermediate forms, 
which have the double meaning of an alteration of the primordial heritage and of the 
elevation to higher forms of the chthonic and demonic themes typical of the southern 
aboriginal races. This is why I did not simply say “South,” but “Southern Light,” and 
why I will use the term “lunar spirituality” to characterize the second cycle, in refer¬ 
ence to the moon as a bright and yet nonsolar symbol, which is almost similar to a 
“heavenly Earth,” namely, to a purified land (South). 

Because of numerous elements, there is no doubt that the themes of the Mother 
or Woman, the Waters, and the Earth all trace their origins to the South and are also 
recurrent, through transpositions and interpolations, in all the ensuing “Atlantic” 
traces and memories; this has misled some into thinking that the cult of the Mother 
was typical of the Northern- Atlantic civilization. According to a well-established idea, 
there is a connection between Mouru—one of the “creations” that, according to the 
Zend-Avesta, 2 came after the Arctic seat—and the “Atlantic” cycle, and therefore, 

2. Vendidnd , 1.4. 


204 


205 



Geiiesis mid Face of the FTIoDERn World 


Horth odd South 


Mouru should be equated with the “Land of the Mother.” 3 Moreover, if some have 
attempted to see in the prehistoric Magdalenian civilization (of an Atlantic origin) 
the original center from which a civilization—in which the Mother Goddess enjoyed 
such a predominant role that some could say that at the dawn of civilization the woman 
radiates such a bright light through religion that the male figure is confined to the shad¬ 
ows—spread throughout the Neolithic Mediterranean; and if some have claimed to 
have discerned in the Hiberic-Cantabric cycle the same characteristics of the lunar, 
Demetrian mystery that is dominant in the pre-Hellenic Pelasgic civilization—undoubt¬ 
edly there must be some truth in this. After all, the name Tuatha de Danaan, which is 
found in the Irish cycle and characterizes a divine race from the West, means “the 
people of the goddess Dana.” The legends, the memories, and tire metahistorical trans¬ 
positions according to which a western island was the residence of a goddess, a queen, 
or a piiestess-ruler, are numerous and very revealing. I previously mentioned some 
of these references. The custody of the golden apples (which may represent the tra¬ 
ditional heritage of the first age and the symbol of the spiritual states proper to it) lo¬ 
cated in Zeus’s western garden, according to the myth, became the responsibility not 
only of women, butof the daughters of Atlas, the Hesperides. According to some Gaelic 
sagas, the Atlantic Avalon was ruled by a regal virgin; also, the woman who appeared 
to Conall in order to lure him to the “Land of the Living” implied through symbols 
that this land was inhabited only by women and by children/ Hesiod declared that 
the Silver Age was characterized by a very long period of “infancy” under maternal 
tutelage; 5 this is the same idea, conveyed through the same symbolism. Even the des¬ 
ignation “Silver Age” is a reminder of the lunar light and of a lunar, matriarchical 
era. In Celtic myths we find the recurrent theme of the woman who bestows immor¬ 
tality on the heroin the Western Island. 6 This corresponds to (1) the Hellenic legend 
of Calypso, daughter of Atlas, queen of the mysterious island of Ogygia, a divine 
woman who enjoyed immortality and gave it to those whom she chose; 7 (2) the theme 


3. This was the opinion of H. Wirth. The term nw is often found in the Maya civilization, which may be 
eonstdered a residue of the Southern cycle. The sea. of this cycle was a very ancient continent that in¬ 
cluded Atlantis and perhaps stretched to the Pacific. It seems that in the Mayan tablets of the Troana 
Codex, mention is made of a certain Mu, a queen or divine woman who traveled west as far as Europe. Ma 
or Mu was also the name of the main Mother goddess of ancient Crete. 

4. Joyce, Old Celtic Romances, 108, 

5. Hesiod, Works and Days, 130-32. 

6 ' AH 7‘ ie8end ° f m ° nkS Wh ° f ° Und 3 g °' den Ci ‘ y and ' he pr ° phelS wh0 ncver dicd in "’ 6 middle 

^m me r t made ° f “ S,a,ue 0f 11 woman in ,he middle Of the sea, made of ••copper” 
(Venus s metal) pointing the way. ^ 1 

7. Odyssey, 1.50; 7.245, 257; 22.336. We may connect this with what Strabo wrote (Geogrnphin 4 4 5) con- 

in which ,he cu " - <*. « as 

L son ficatfon on. a T' h , k m3de ° fAnna Atlan,ean n * mph ' Anna ° r A "" a P«™nna is bn, a 
WS lmm0r ‘ ality ^ SanSkfit: ^ Wl ’ iCh iS ° f,en aSS ° Cia,ed Wi "' l!,C 


of the “virgin who sits on the throne of the seas” along the western path followed by 
Gilgamesh, and who is the goddess of wisdom and the guardian of life—a virgin who 
tends to be contused with the mother goddess Ishtar; (3) the Nordic,myth of Idunn 
(“Land of the Ever Young”) and of its apples that grant and renew eternal life; (4) 
the Far Eastern tradition concerning the “western paradise,” in the aspect in which it 
is also called “Land of the Western Woman”; 8 and finally, (5) the great Mexican tra¬ 
dition relative to the divine woman, mother of the great Huitzilopochtli, who remained 
the ruler of the sacred oceanic land of Aztlan. These are echoes that, directly or indi¬ 
rectly, refer to the same one idea; they are memories, symbols, and allegories that 
need to be dematerialized and regarded as universal references to a “lunar” spiritu¬ 
ality. t0 a regere, and to the participation in a life that is not ephemeral, all of which 
have shifted from the solar and virile aegis to the lunar and “feminine” aegis of the 
Divine Woman. 

It would probably be possible to reach the same conclusions through the Hel¬ 
lenic myth of Aphrodite—a goddess who in her Asiatic variations characterizes the 
Southern component of the Mediterranean civilizations—since according to Hesiod, 
Aphrodite was bom from the foam that gathered about the severed genitals of the 
primordial heavenly deity Uranus, who some believe to represent both the Golden 
Age (like Kronos) and the Northern center. According to the tradition of the Eider 
Eddn , the appearance of the feminine element (“of the three strong daughters of the 
giants”) marks both the end of the Golden Age and the beginning of the first struggles 
between divine races (Aesir and Wanen), and later on between divine races and 
giants; these struggles, as we shall see later on, reflect the spirit of later epochs. 

Considered in her elementary chthonic aspect, the woman, together with the 
earthly demons, was really the main object of the Southern aboriginal cults; this will 
be the source of the great Asiatic-Southern chthonic goddesses and of those god¬ 
desses who represent the monstrous steatopygic female idols of the early megalithic 
period. This goddess of the Southern Hemisphere, who is transfigured and reduced 
to a pure and almost Demetrian form, as exemplified in the Brassampouy caves 
inhabited by Aurignacian man, was introduced and became dominant in the new 
civilization of Westem-Atlantic origin. Along the path of Atlantic colonizers, from 
the Neolithic to the Minoan period and from the Pyrenees to Egypt, we encounter 
female idols almost exclusively, while in the cult there were more priestesses than 
priests, or quite often, effeminate priests. The same motif is present in Thracia, Illyria, 


S. The royal Mother of the West also appears in connection with the “mountain" Kuen-Lun; she possesses 
the elixir of immortality and according to the legend she bestows immortal life to kings such as Wang-Mu. 
In this Chinese view we find a contrast between two components; the pure western land, the seat of the 
mother, and the kingdom of Amitabha, from which women are rigorously excluded. 


206 


207 



GfDEM ftflD fflC£ OP THE IflODEMl UJORLD 


floRTH (mo South 


Mesopotamia, and even in some Northern and Celtic stocks all the way up to the 
time of the Germanic tribes, and especially in India where it has been preserved in 
some Southern forms of the Tantric cult and in the prehistoric traces of the civiliza¬ 
tion of Mohenjo-Daro; not to mention the most recent forms, which I will discuss 
later on in greater detail. 

This is but a brief reference to the primordial chthonic roots of the Southern 
Light, which can be associated with the Southern component found in those civiliza¬ 
tions, traditions, and institutions that emerged in the wake of the great migratory 
tides that moved from west to east; this is a disaggregating component, opposed to 
the original Olympian and Uranian type of spirituality connected with the races of a 
more immediate Northern descent (Northern-Atlantic) or with those races that were 
capable of retaining or of rekindling the fire of the primordial tradition even in an 
environment far removed from the influences of the original one. 

By virtue ot the occult relationship that exists between what takes place on the 
visible plane (which is apparently shaped according to external conditions) and that 
which conveys a deep and even spiritual meaning,, we can refer to environmental 
and climatic factors in order to explain analogically the differentiation that occurred. 
The experience of the sun, of light, and of fire itself naturally acted in the Northern 
races as a liberating spirituality, especially during the long glacial winter; Uranian 
and solar, Olympian, or fiery figures also played a major role in the sacred symbol¬ 
ism of these races. Moreover, the rigorous climate, barren soil, and need for hunting 
as well as the need to migrate across unknown seas and continents naturally 
shaped those who innerly retained this spiritual experience of the sun, bright sky, 
and fire into warriors, conquerors, and navigators, and thus furthered that synthesis 
of virility and spirituality, the characteristic traces of which were retained in the 
Indo-European races. 

In relation to this, it becomes easier to understand another aspect of the previ¬ 
ously mentioned symbolism of sacred stones. The stone or the rock is an expression 
of the haidness, the sacred and ironlike spiritual firmness of those who are “Rescued 
from the Waters.” The stone represents the main characteristic of those who eventu¬ 
ally dominated in later times and who established the traditional centers following 
the Great Flood in places where the sign of the “center,” the “pole,” and “God’s 
house” often reemerged in the symbolic stone as a variation of the omphalos." Hence, 
the Hellenic theme of the second race, bom from “stone” after the flood; 9 10 the idea 
that Mithras was believed to have been bom from stone; that stones were believed to 

9. R. Guenon. Le Roidu monde, chap. 10. The Hebrew lerm baiihel or bethel, which corresponds 10 omphalos, 
means “the house of God.” 

10. Arnobius, The Case Against the Pagans, 11.5. 


point out true kings or that they are found at the beginning of the Via Sacra (see the 
Roman lapis niger , or black stone); that sacred stones were the material from which 
fatal swords are made; and finally, that meteorites, or “stones from heaven,” or 
“thunderbolts,” were often turned into axes, the weapon and the symbol of prehis¬ 
toric conquerors. 

Conversely, it was only natural that in the South the object of the most immedi¬ 
ate experience was not the solar principle, but rather its effects displayed in the 
luscious fertility of the Earth, and that the center shifted toward Mother Earth por¬ 
trayed as Magna Mater while the symbolism shifted to chthonic deities or beings, to 
gods and goddesses of vegetation and of vegetal and animal fertility, while fire, 
once perceived as a divine, heavenly, and beneficial reality, eventually came to be 
perceived as something “infernal,” ambiguous, and telluric. The favorable climate 
and the natural plentiness eventually induced most people to seek peace and rest 
and to cultivate the feeling of contemplation and of getting lost in nature, rather than 
an active pursuit of affirmation and self-transcendence. 11 Therefore, even in the or¬ 
der of what can be affected to a certain degree by external factors, while the North¬ 
ern Light goes hand in hand, through solar and Uranian symbols, with a virile ethos 
and a warrior spirituality consisting of a harsh will to establish order and to dominate, 
conversely, in the Southern traditions the predominance of the chthonic theme and 
of the pathos of death and resurrection corresponds to a certain propensity to promis¬ 
cuity, escapism, a sense of abandonment, and a naturalistic pantheism with sensual 
or mystical and contemplative overtones. 12 

In every historical epoch that follows the descent of the Northern races it is 
possible to detect the action of two opposing tendencies that can be traced, one way 
or another, back to the fundamental polarity of North-South. In every civilization 
that emerged later on it is possible to recognize the dynamic outcome of either the 
encounter or the clash of these two tendencies, which generated more or less lasting 
forms until the advent of forces and of processes that ushered in the later Bronze and 

11, “To leach wilh kindly benevolence, not to lose one’s temper and avenge the unreasonableness of others, 
that is the virile energy of the South that is followed by the well-bred man. To sleep on a heap of arms and 
untanned skins, to die unflinching and as if dying were not enough, that is the virile energy of the North 
that is followed by the brave man,” Clwng-yung, 10.4. 

12. Having suggested that the symbolism of the solstices has a “polar” character, while the symbolism of the 
equinoxes is referred to the western and eastern direction and to the “Atlantic” civilization, 1 think, it is 
interesting to consider the meaning of some equinoctial feasts in relation to the themes typical of South¬ 
ern civilizations; in this regard the exegesis of Emperor Julian ( Hymn to the Mother of the Gods , !73e-d; 
175a—b) is very significant. When an equinox occurs, the sun seems to escape from its orbit and law and 
to get lost in the unlimited; at that time the sun is at its “antipolar” and “anti-Olympian” peak. This 
tendency toward evasion and escapism corresponds to the pathos of the promiscuous feasts that some 
people celebrated during the spring equinox in the name of the Great Mother; these feasts were some¬ 
times connected with the myth of the “castration” of her solar son-lover. 


208 


209 



GEIIEM MID fflCE Of IHE UlODERf) HJORLD 


Iron Ages. Not only within every single civilization but even in the struggle between 
various civilizations and in the advent of one tendency and in the demise of the 
other, deeper meanings will often surface; it will also be possible to notice again the 
advent or the demise of forces that are inspired by either one of these spiritual poles, 
with a greater or lesser reference to the ethnic lines that originally either knew the 
“Northern Light” or fell under the spell of the Mothers and of the Southern ecstasies. 


27 


The Civilization of the Mother 


I n order to undertake this kind of research successfully, it is necessary to provide a 
more exact typological characterization of the forms of civilization that followed 
the primordial one. First of all, I will discuss the notion of the “civilization of the 
Mother.” 1 The characteristic trait of this civilization is a transposition into the meta¬ 
physical of the view of woman as the principle and substance of generation; a god¬ 
dess expresses the supreme reality, while every being, conceived as a son or daugh¬ 
ter, appears next to her as something conditioned, subordinated, lacking life in itself, 
and ephemeral. This is the type of the great Asiatic-Mediterranean goddesses of 
life, such as Isis, Asherat, Cybele, Tanit, and especially Demeter (Ceres to the Ro¬ 
mans), a central figure in the Pelasgic-Minoan cycle. The representation of the solar 
principle as a child resting on the lap of the Great Mother, suggesting that it was 
generated from her; the Egyptian-Minoan representations of queens or divine women 
holding the lotus and the key to life; Ishtar, celebrated by one of the most ancient 
recorded hymns with the words: “There is no true god besides you,” and who is often 
referred to as Ummu ilani, “the Mother of the gods”; the various allusions, often with 
cosmological transpositions, to an alleged primacy of the “night” principle over the 
“day” principle arising from her bosom, and therefore of dark or lunar deities over 
manifested and diurnal ones; the ensuing characteristic sense of the “occult” as des¬ 
tiny and as a fatalistic law from which nobody can escape; the priority, in some 
archaic symbolisms (often connected with the lunar rather than with the solar mea¬ 
sure of time) of the sign or of the god of the moon over that of the sun (see for 
instance the primacy enjoyed by the Babylonian god Sin over Shamash) and the 
inversion whereby the moon was sometimes portrayed as a masculine deity and the 
sun as a feminine deity; the part assigned to the principle of the waters and to the 
relative cult of the serpent and of analogous entities; and also, on a different plane, 


I. A reading of Bachofen’s Das Mutterrechl (i897) will show the extent to which I have employed the 
findings of this scholar and the extent to which I have integrated them in a wider and more up-to-date 
order of ideas. 


210 


211 



Gedem aod Face of the fTlooERn IJLIorld 


The CiviuzATion of the Mother 


the subordination of Adonis to Aphrodite, Virbius to Diana, some forms of Osiris 
(who was transformed from his original solar form into a lunar god of the waters) to 
Isis," lacchus to Demeter, the Asiatic Heracles to Milittas—all of these examples 
seem to point in the same direction. Little statues of the Mother with child dating 
back to the Neolithic are found everywhere in the Southern Hemisphere, from 
Mesopotamia to the Atlantic. 

In the civilization of Crete, where the homeland was called “motherland” (gexpic) 
rather than “fatherland” (mrpig), which also exhibits a specific relation with the 
Atlantic-Southern civilization 2 3 4 and with the substratum of even more ancient cults in 
the South, the gods were believed to be mortal; just like summer, every year they 
underwent death. In Cretan civilization Zeus (Teshub) did not have a father, and his 
mother was the humid soil; the “woman” was therefore at the beginning, while the 
god himself was a “generated” and mortal being and his sepulcher was shown from 
geneiation to generation on Crete s Mount Iouktas. * Conversely, the unchanging 
feminine substratum of every form of life was believed to be immortal, According to 
Hesiod’s Theogony, when the shadows of Chaos are dispersed, the black goddess 
Gaia (g£?icciv(x ycctccj, a feminine principle, makes her 1 appearance. Gaia generates 
her own male or bridegroom without a spouse, after producing the “great moun¬ 
tains,” the Ocean, and the Pontus; Gaia’s entire divine offspring, which Hesiod lists 
following a tradition that should not be confused with thaL of the pure Olympian 
stock, is portrayed as a world subject to movement, change, and becoming. 

On a lower plane, and on the basis of traces that have been preserved until the 
earliest recorded historical times, it is possible to recognize in some of the Asiatic 
Mediterranean cults ritual expressions that characterize this inversion of values. Take, 
for instance, the Sacchean and Phrygian festivals. The Sacchean festivals, which were 
celebrated in honor ol the great Goddess, culminated in the slaying of a person who 
repi esented the male regal figure. 5 The dismissal of the virile element on the occa¬ 
sion ol the celebration of the Goddess was also found in a dramatic way in the castra¬ 

2. Plutarch, Dc [side et Outride, 41; 33. Diodorus Siculus (.Bibliotheca histories. 1.27) related that in Egypt the 
queen enjoyed greater powers and was given higher honors than the king, to reflect the fact that Isis 
survived Osins and that site was credited with the resurrection of the god and with the bestowal of many 
gifts to mankind (since she embodied the immortal principle and knowledge). I would add that this view 
icf]eels the decadence of the primordial Egyptian civilization, 

3. Buehofen, Munerecht, chap, 1. Herodotus says that originally the Licians (the primordial inhabitants of 
Crete) adopted their mothers' rather than their fathers’ names. 

4. Callimachus, Hymn to Zeus, 1.9-15. 

5. Dio Chrysostom, Orattones, 4.66. Although the modem interpretations that see in this ritual the slaying of 
the “spirit of vegetation” are typical of the whims of the ethnologists, nevertheless we find a predominant 

chthonic character in these Sacchean rituals that is found among several other peoples. Philo of Biblos 
recalled that Kronos sacrificed his son after putting the regal robe on him; in this context. Kronos is not 
the king of the Golden Age, but he represents time, which in later ages gains power over all forms of life 

and from which the new Olympian stock manages to escape only thanks to a stone. The sacrifice recalls 


tions performed during Cybele’s Mysteries: sometimes the priests who felt possessed 
by the Goddess would go so far as emasculating themselves in order to resemble her 
and to become transformed into the female type, which was conceived as the highest 
manifestation of the sacred. Moreover, from the temples of Astarte and of Artemis at 
Ephesus toHieropolis the priests were often eunuchs. Consider the following: (a) the 
Lydian Hercules, dressed as a woman, who for three years serves the imperious 
Omphales, who was a type of the divine woman like Seramis; (bjthe fact that those 
who participated in some Mysteries consecrated to Heracles or to Dionysus often wore 
women’s clothes; (c) the fact that priests dressed in women’s clothes would keep watch 
in the sacred woods by some ancient Germanic trees; (d) the ritual inversion of sex 
whereby some statues of Nana-lshtar in Susa and of Venus in Cyprus would display 
masculine features, and whereby women dressed as men and men dressed as women 
celebrated their cult; 6 and finally (e) the Pelasgic-Minoan offering of broken weap¬ 
ons to the Goddess and the usurpation of the sacred Hyperborean warrior symbol of 
the battle-axe by Amazonian figures and southern goddesses—all of these instances 
represent the fragmentary, materialized, and distorted echoes, none of them any less 
characteristic, of the overall view according to which (as the feminine became the 
fundamental symbol of sacredness, strength, and life) the masculine element and men 
in general came to be looked down upon as irrelevant, innerly inconsistent, ephem¬ 
eral, of little value, and as a source of embarrassment. 

Mater = Earth, gremium maths tetrae. This equivalence suggests a main point, 
namely, that in the type of civilizations with Southern roots it is possible to include all 
the varieties of cults, myths, and rituals in which the chthonic theme predominates; 
in which the masculine element appears; and in which not only goddesses but gods 
of the earth, of growth, natural fertility, the waters, or the subterranean fire are to be 
found. The Mothers presided over the subterranean world and the occult, conceived 
of in terms of night and darkness and in opposition to coeium, which also suggests the 
generic idea of the invisible, though in its higher, luminous, and heavenly aspect. 
Moreover, there is a fundamental and well-known opposition between the Deus, the 
type of the luminous deities of the Indo-European pantheon, 7 and Al, who is the ob¬ 
ject of the demonic, ecstatic, and frenzied cult of the dark southern races that lack any 

the ephemeral character of every life, even when it has a regal dignity. While in the Sacchean feasts the 
role of the king was played by a prisoner sentenced to death—just as, according to the truth of the Mother, 
everybody is sentenced to die at their birth—this may contain a deep meaning. 

6. Macrobius, Satumnlhi, 3.7.2. An analogous change of sex occurred at Argos during the feast of the Hibristics, 
and also in the marriage ritual that was retained in some ancient traditions or employed by some primitive 
populations that are the degenerated remnants of lost civilizations. 

7. The “gods,” according to Varro, are beings of light and the day. Heaven is at the origins of all things and 
it expresses the highest power. The root of Zeus, as that of Jupiter (the Dens Pater), is the same as that for 
devit, Dyaus, and similar words, that refer to the splendor of the sky and the brightness of the day. 


212 


213 



Geiiem mid Face oe the Modem IUorld 


The (iviLizfliion oe the Mother 


contact with what is truly supernatural. In reality, the infernal-demonic element, or the 
elemental kingdom of the subterranean powers, defines the lower aspect of the cult 
of the Mother. In opposition to all this there is the "Olympian,” immutable, and acosmic 
reality bathed in the light of a world of intelligible essences (Koapog voprog), and 
sometimes dramatized in the form of gods of war, victory, splendor, or heavenly fire. 

If in southern civilizations (in which the feminine, telluric cult predominates) burial 
was the prevalent funerary rite, while cremation was practiced among civilizations of 
northern and Aryan origin, this reflects the abovementioned view; namely, that the 
destiny of the individual was not to become purified from earthly residues and to as¬ 
cend to heavenly regions, but rather to return to the depths of the Earth and to become 
dissolved into the chthomc Magna Mater, who was the source of his ephemeral life. 
This explains the subterranean rather than heavenly location of the kingdom of the 
dead, which is typical of the most ancient ethnic strata of the South, According to its 
symbolical meaning, the burial of the dead was characteristic of the cycle of the Mother. 

Generally speaking, it is possible to establish a relationship between feminine 
spirituality and pantheism, according to which ultimate reality is conceived as a great 
sea into which the nucleus of an individual merges and becomes dissolved like a 
grain of salt. In pantheism, personality is an illusory and temporary manifestation of 
the one undifferentiated substance, which is simultaneously spirit and nature as well 
as the only reality; in this Weltanschauung there is no room for any authentically 
transcendent order. It is necessary to add—and this will be a key factor when assess¬ 
ing the meaning of later cycles—that those forms in which the divine is conceived of 
as a person represent a mixed and yet similar thing; 14 in these forms we find a con¬ 
nection between the naturalistic relationship of generation and creation of man and 
the corresponding pathos of utter dependence, humility, passivity, surrender, and 
renunciation of one’s will. Strabo’s opinion (Geographic, 7.3.4), according to which 
prayer was taught to man by woman, is very significant in this regard. 

I had previously suggested that the materialization of true virility is the inevi¬ 
table counterpart of the femininization of spirituality. This motif, which will intro¬ 
duce further modifications of various civilizations during the Bronze or Iron Age, 
helps to characterize other aspects of the civilization of the Mother. 

When we compare femininity with virility understood in material terms, such as 
physical strength, harshness, and violent affirmation, it is only natural that the woman, 
owing to hei characteristics of sensitivity, self-sacrifice, and love—not to mention 
the mystery of procreation—was regarded as the representative of a higher prin- 

8. I am referring to cases in which this attitude was not typical only of the inferior strata of a civilization and 
the exoteric aspect of a tradition, and in which it did not even occur in a given ascciical path as a transitory 
phase, but formed all relationships with the divine. 


ciple, she was even able to acquire authority and to appear as an image of the uni¬ 
versal Mother. Thus, it is not a contradiction that in some instances, spiritual and 
even social gynaecocracy did not appear in effeminate but in violent and bellicose 
societies. Indeed, the genera l symbol of the Silver Age and of the Atlantic cycle was 
not a demonically telluric or a coarsely naturalistic symbol (as in the case of the 
cycle of the coarse prehistoric feminine idols), but one in which the feminine prin¬ 
ciple was elevated to a higher form, almost like in the ancient symbol of the Moon as 
a purified ot heavenly Earth (ovpocviT] ouBepirj Xfj), and as such, ruling over any¬ 
thing terrestrial; 9 a spiritual or moral authority was therefore bestowed upon femi¬ 
ninity that piedominates over purely material and physical virile instincts and qualities. 

We find this higher form in those regions where the entities that not only safe¬ 
guard natural customs and laws, avenge sacrilege, and punish misdeeds (from the 
northern women to the Erinyes, Themis, and Dike), but that also mediate the gift of 
immortality are portrayed as female. This form was usually characterized as 
Demetrian and it was associated with chaste symbols of virgins or mothers who 
conceive without a male partner, or with goddesses of vegetal fertility and crops 
such as Ceres. A true opposition exists between the Demetrian and the Aphrodistic 
type. This differentiation may be associated with the opposition found in Far Eastern 
countries between the “Pure Land” inhabited by the “Western Woman” and the 
subterranean world of Emma-O; in the Hellenic traditions this opposition existed 
between the symbol of Athena and the symbol of the Gorgons whom she fights. The 
pure and peaceful Demetrian spirituality, portrayed as the moon’s light, character¬ 
ized the type of the Silver Age and, most likely, the cycle of the first Atlantic civili¬ 
zation; historically, however, it was not the original spirituality, but rather a product 
of an ensuing transformation. 111 Effective forms of gynaecocracy developed in those 
places where the symbol became a reality; traces of it can be found in the most 
ancient substratum of several civilizations. 11 Just as leaves are not bom one from 
another but derive from the trunk, likewise, although man produces life, it is woman 

9. “For Selene is the last of the heavenly spheres that Athena fills with wisdom; and by her aid Selene 
beholds the intelligible that is higher than the heavens, and adorns with its forms the realm of matter that 
lies below her, and thus she does away with its savagery and confusion and disorder.” Emperor Julian, 
Hymn to King Helios , 150a. 

10. Bachofen’s views, which in many regards are true from a traditional point of view, should be rejected or 
at least integrated whenever they take as a reference point and assume as an original and even older 
element that which is connected with the Earth and with the Mother; these views posit something like a 
spontaneous evolution from the inferior to the superior in those cases in which there are forms of “mix¬ 
ture” between the inferior (the South) and the superior (the Hyperborean element). 

1 l. A characteristic example is the legend of Jurupary, which reflects the sense of the recent Peruvian civili¬ 
zation. Jurupary was a hero who appeared in societies ruled by “women” to reveal a secret solar law, 
reserved to men alone, to be taught in every nation, against the ancient law of the mothers. Jurupary, like 
Quetzalcoatl, eventually withdrew to the sacred land situated east of America. 


214 


215 


Genesis and Face of the Modem World 


The Civilizrtioii of the Mother 


who begets it. The son does not perpetuate the race, but merely enjoys an individual 
existence circumscribed to the time and place in which he happens to live; real con¬ 
tinuity abides in the feminine-motherly principle. Hence, as a consequence, the woman 
as mother was the center and the foundation of a people’s or a family’s laws and the 
genealogical transmission took place through the feminine bloodline. By transposi¬ 
tion, if we go from the family to society at large, we arrive at structures of a collectiv¬ 
ist and communist type. In reference to the unity of origin and to the maternal principle 
of which we are all the children, aequitas becomes aequalitas; relationships of uni¬ 
versal brotherhood and equality are established; a sympathy reaching out beyond all 
boundaries and differences is affirmed; and a tendency to share whatever one pos¬ 
sesses, which is considered to be a gift of Mother Earth, is encouraged. An echo of 
this motif is found in the fact that until recently, during festivals that celebrated chthonic 
goddesses and the return of men to the great Mother of Life (not without a revival of 
an orgiastic element typical of the lowest southern forms) all men felt themselves to 
be free and equal; caste and class distinctions no longer applied, but could freely be 
overturned; and a general licentiousness and pleasure in promiscuity tended to be 
rather widespread. 

On the other hand, the so called “natural law” and common promiscuity typical 
of several savage populations of a totemic type (Africa and Polynesia), up to the so- 
called Slavic mir, almost always point to the typical context of the “civilization of the 
Mother,” even in those places in which matriarchy was not found and where, rather 
than mixed-variations of the primordial boreal civilization, we find remnants of 
tellurism inherent to inferior autochthonous races. The communal theme, together 
with the ideal of a society that does not know wars and that is free and harmonious is 
found in various descriptions of the earlier ages, including the Golden Age and Plato’s 
description of primordial Atlantis. But this, in my view, is merely due to mistaking a 
relatively recent memory with a more distant one. The “lunar” theme of peace and 
community in a naturalistic sense has little to do with those themes that character¬ 
ized the first age. 12 

Once we eliminate this misunderstanding and bring them back to their true set¬ 
ting (namely, to the second age of the Mother, or Silver rather than Golden Age), the 
abovementioned memories concerning a primordial, peaceful, and communitarian 
world close to nature and without conflicts and divisions, become very significant. 

12. The Saturnalia, by evoking the Golden Age in which Saturn reigned, celebrated the promiscuity and 
universal brotherhood that were believed to characterize this age, In reality, this belief represents a 
deviation from traditional truth, und the Saturn who was evoked was not the king of the Golden Age, but 
'ather a chthonic demon; this can be established by the fact that he was represented in the company of 
Ops, a form of the earth goddess. 


On the other hand, if we bring this order of ideas to its logical conclusion, we 
arrive at a morphological characterization of fundamental importance. In reference 
to what I have expounded in the first part of this work concerning the meaning of the 
primordial regality and the relationships between regality and priesthood, it is pos¬ 
sible to see that the type of society ruled by a priestly class and yet dominated by 
“feminine” spirituality, which is characterized by the subordination of the spirit to 
priestly matters and the confinement of the regal function to a subordinated and 
material role—this type of society tends to be dominated by a gynaecocratic and 
lunar spirit or by a Demetrian form, especially if it is oriented toward the ideal of 
mystical unity and brotherhood. In opposition to a society articulated according to 
specific hierarchies and animated by a “triumphal” assumption of the spirit and cul¬ 
minating in regal superhumanity—this society reflects the truth of the Mother, but in 
one of its sublimated versions. This version is in line with what probably character¬ 
ized the best period of the Atlantic cycle, which was reproduced and preserved in the 
colonies that developed from the Pelasgic populations into the cycle of the great 
Asiatic-Mediterranean goddesses of life. 

Thus in myth and ritual, in the general views concerning life and the sacred, and 
in laws, ethics, and even social forms one finds specific elements. These elements 
can be found in the historical world only as fragments mixed together with other 
motifs, transposed to other planes, yet leading back, at least ideally, to the same 
basic orientation. This orientation corresponds to the Southern alteration of the pri¬ 
mordial tradition and to the spiritual deviation from the “pole” that occurred, parallel 
to the change of location, in the mixed-variations of the original boreal stock, and the 
civilizations of the “Silver Age.” This is what must be held by those who accept the 
meanings of North and South—not only morphologically in relation to two universal 
types of civilization (it is a l ways possible to l imit oneself to this minimalist view), but 
also as points of reference—in order to integrate into a higher meaning the dynamics 
and the struggle of historical and spiritual forces in the development of recent civili¬ 
zations, in the latest phase of the “twilight of the gods.” 1 " 1 


13. A, Rosenberg in The My th of the Twentieth Century { Munich, 1930), was right to claim, against Bachofen, 
that it is necessary to differentiate and not to put civilizations in a linear succession; that the “civilization 
of the Mother,” which Bachofen thought to be the oldest stage from which Uranian and patriarchical 
societies ‘‘evolved” as superior and more recent forms, in reality was a heterogeneous, independent 
world, inhabited by other races that eventually clashed or came in contact with Nordic traditions, Rosenberg 
was also right to criticize Wiuh’s association, concerning the Northern-Atlamic cycle, of the solar cull 
with the cult of the Mother, which consistently presents chthonic and lunar, rather than solar, characteris¬ 
tics. Such confusions are driven by both the temporal distance between us and those events, and by their 
assumption of mythical forms; in many traditions the memories of the Arctic cycle are fused together with 
the memories of the Atlantic cycle. 


216 


217 




The Cycles of Decadence and the Heroic Cycle 


28 


The Cycles of Decadence 
and the Heroic Cycle 


I n relation to the period preceding the Flood, the biblical myth mentions a race of 
“heroes of old, the men of renown” (Gen. 6:4), bom of the union between the sons 
of heaven and the daughters of men. This union is an example of the miscegenation 
that caused the primordial spirituality to give way to the spirituality of the age of the 
Mother. The offspring of this union was the race of the Giants (Nephilim in Hebrew), 
whom the Book of Enoch refers to as “the people from the Far West.” The biblical 
myth relates that the earth became filled with violence and wickedness, thus draw¬ 
ing upon itself the catastrophe of the Flood. 

The myth of a fantastic “androgynous” race of powerful beings that the gods 
themselves feared constitutes another example of nonhuman races; in order to neu¬ 
tralize these beings, the gods broke them into two halves, into “male” and “female.” 1 
The symbolism of the inimical pair,” found in several traditions, sometimes refers 
to a similar division that destroys the power feared by the gods; this motif is suscep¬ 
tible to a historical and even a metaphysical interpretation. The primordial powerful 
and divine race of androgynous beings may be related with the period in which the 
Nephilim were “men of renown”; it is the race of the Golden Age. After this race, a 
new division occurred; the “One” generated the “Two,” the couple, or the dyad. The 
first of the two elements is the Woman (Atlantis), the second is Man. This Man was 
no longer pure spirit and he eventually rebelled against the lunar symbolism by 

1. Plato, Symposium, 189c2—d6. Concerning the theme of the “pair,” we may recall that according to Plato 
the primordial woman Kleito generated three couples in the mythical Atlantis; this corresponds to the 
Mexican tradition describing the cycle of the Waters, Atonatiu, in which the serpent woman Ciuatcoati 
generated a large number of twins. The Mexican cycle ended with a deluge that corresponds in the small¬ 
est details (survival of the seeds of all living things, the sending forth of a vulture that does not return and 
of a hummingbird that returns with a green branch in its beak) to the biblical account. 


either affirming himself or by pursuing violent conquests and by attempting to usurp 
certain spiritual powers. 

This is the myth of the Titans. They are the Giants. This is the Bronze Age. In 
Plato’s Cntias violence and injustice, yearning for power, and covetousness are the 
qualities ascribed to the degenerated inhabitants of Atlantis. 2 In another Hellenic 
myth it is said that “men living in primordial times [to which Deucalion, who sur¬ 
vived the Flood, belonged] were filled with arrogance and pride; they were guilty of 
many crimes; they broke oaths and were merciless.” 

An essential feature of myth and symbol is that both are apt to convey multiple 
meanings, which must be separated in a clear-cut fashion and assigned methodically 
to different categories by means of adequate interpretations. This is also the case of 
the “inimical pair” and of the Titans. 

On the basis of the duality Man-Woman (in the sense of a materialized virility 
and of a merely priestly spirituality), which is the premise of the new types of civili¬ 
zation derived by involution from the primordial civilization, it is possible to define 
the following types. 

The first type of civilization is the Titanic one, in a negative sense, and refers to 
the spirit of a materialistic and violent race that no longer recognized the authority of 
the spiritual principle corresponding to the priestly symbol or to the spiritually femi¬ 
nine “brother” (e.g., Cain vs. Abel); this race affirmed itself and attempted to take 
possession, by surprise and through an inferior type of employment, of a body of 
knowledge that granted control over certain invisible powers inherent to things and 
people. Therefore, this represented an upheaval and a counterfeit of what could 
have been the privilege of the previous “glorious men,” namely, of the virile spiritu¬ 
ality connected to the function of order and of domination “from above.” It was 
Prometheus who usurped the heavenly fire in favor of the human races, and yet he 
did not know how to carry it; thus the fire became his source of torment and damna¬ 
tion 3 until he was freed by another hero, Heracles, who was worthier and also one 


2. ‘■‘To the perceptive eye the depth of their degeneration was clear enough, but to those whose judgment of 
true happiness is detective, they seemed, in their pursuit of unbridled ambition and power, to be at the 
height of their fame and fortune." Plato, Critins. 

3. The punishment met by Prometheus contains symbolic elements that reveal its esoteric meaning; an 
“eagle" ate his liver. The eagle or the sparrow hawk, birds of prey sacred to Zeus and lo Apollo (in Egypt 
to Horns, among the Nordic people to Odin-Wotan, in India to Agni and India), were among the symbols 
of the regal “glory," in other words, of the divine fire that Prometheus stole. The liver was considered the 
seat of a feisty spirit and of the “irascible soul." The shift of the divine force onto the plane of merely 
human and impure qualities that are not adequate to it was whai consumed Prometheus and was his 
punishment as well. 1 have already mentioned the double aspect in the symbolism of the Titan Atlas in 
which the idea of a “polar" function and of a punishment are seen as interchangeable. 


218 


219 



Genesis nod Free of the Modern UJorld 


The Cycles of Decadence and the Heroic Cycle 


reconciled with the Olympian principle (i.e., with Zeus) and its ally in the struggle 
against the Giants. The second race was “far worse than the other,” both naturally 
(pvi) v) and mentally (voppa). According to Hesiod, as early as the end of the First 
age, it: refused to pay respect to the gods and thus opened itself up to the influence of 
telluric forces (according to Hesiod, at the end of its cycle it became the race of 
subterranean demons, the i >nox66vioi)\ it eventually produced a mortal generation 
characterized by pertinacity, physical strength, and an uncontrolled pleasure in vio¬ 
lence, war, and power (this corresponds to Hesiod’s Bronze Age, to the Persians’ 
Iron Age, and to the biblical giants, or Nephilim). 4 According to yet another Hellenic 
tradition, Zeus is believed to have caused the Flood in order to extinguish the “fire” 
element that threatened to destroy the entire earth, as Phaeton, the son of the Sun, 
lost control of the quadriga that the frenzied horses had carried up into the sky. “Age 
of battle-axes, age of swords, age of wolves, until the world is ruined. Brothers will 
fight and kill each other”: this is the prophecy contained in the Edda. 5 Men living in 
this age have hearts “as hard as iron.” But no matter how scary these men may 
appear, they will fall victim to the black death and disappear into the “moldering 
domain [evpadvm] of cold Hades.” 6 While the biblical myth claims that the Flood 
put an end to this civilization, we may assume that the Atlantic cycle ended with a 
simitar stock and that a similar civilization was eventually swept away by the oce¬ 
anic catastrophe—and maybe because of the previously mentioned abuse of certain 
secret powers (Titanic black magic). 

Generally speaking, according to the Northern tradition, the “Age of the Battle- 
Axes” opened the way to the unleashing of the elemental powers, that eventually 
swept away the divine race of the Aesir—in this context this race may be made to 
correspond with the race of the residual groups of the golden race and to the break¬ 
ing down of the barriers of the “fortress at the center of the world,” which express 
figuratively the creative limits established by the primordial “polar” spirituality. The 
emergence of women and of a no-longer virile spirituality heralded the “twilight of 
the Aesir” and the end of the golden cycle. 7 During this time, the dark strength that 
the Aesir themselves had nourished, after keeping it chained for a while—symbol¬ 
ized by the wolf Fertrir, or better, by two wolves—“grows tremendously.” 8 This cor¬ 
responds to the usurpation of the Titans, which was immediately followed by the 
revolt and the emergence of all the elemental powers, the Southern infernal fire, and 

4. Hesiod, Works and Days, 129-42; 143-55. 

5. Gy I faginning, 5. 

6. Hesiod, Works and Days, 154. 

7. Gyifnginning, 51. 

8. Ibid., 34, From the mention that the two wolves were generated by a giantess (Gylfuginning, 12) we can 

.see the inner connection between the various “stages of decadence.” 


the beings of the earth (hiinthuvsen) that used to be kept outside the walls of Asgard. 
The bond is broken. After the “Age of the Battle-Axe” (the Bronze Age) one of the 
two wolves “will swallow the sun. Then the other wolf will catch the Moon”: 9 in 
other words, this is the end not only of the solar spirituality, but of the Demetrian, 
lunar spirituality as well. Odin, the king of the Aesir, falls, and Vidar himself, who 
succeeded in killing the wolf Fenrir, falls victim to its poison; in other words his own 
divine nature as an Aesir is corrupted by the lethal principle that is passed on to him 
by this wild creature. Fate or the twilight (rok) of the gods takes place with the col¬ 
lapse of the Bifrost bridge that connects heaven and earth; 10 this represents the earth 
abandoned to itself, lacking all connections with the divine element, following the 
rebellion of the Titans. This is the “Dark Age,” or “Iron Age” that comes after the 
Bronze Age. 

A more concrete reference is given by the concurrent witnesses of the oral and 
written traditions of several peoples that mention a frequent opposition between the 
representatives of the spiritual and the temporal (i.e., regal or warrior) powers, re¬ 
gardless of the special forms assumed by either one in adapting to different historical 
circumstances. This phenomenon was just another aspect of the process leading to 
the third age. The usurpation of the priestly caste was followed by the revolt of the 
warrior class and by its struggle against the priestly class for the achievement of 
supreme authority; this was the prelude to an even lower stage than that reached by 
a Demetrian and priestly society; this was the social equivalent of the Bronze Age 
and of the Titanic, Luciferian, or Promethean motif. 

While the Titanic upheaval represented the degenerated (in a materialistic, vio¬ 
lent, and almost individualistic sense) attempt to reinstate “virility,” it nevertheless 
corresponded to an analogous deviation from the sacred female law that character¬ 
ized the “Amazonian” phenomenon. From a symbolic point of view the Amazons 
and the generic type of aimed goddesses can be understood, following Bachofen, as 
an abnormally empowered gynaecocracy, or as an attempt to react and to reinstate 

9. Concerning the “wolf” and the “Age of the Wolf,” here portrayed as synonymous with the Bronze Age 
and with the “Dark Age,” we must keep in mind that this symbolism also has an opposite meaning: the 
wolf was associated with Apollo and with the light (Jy-kos, lyke), not only among the Hellenes, but also 
among the Celts. The positive meaning of the wolf appears in the Roman cycle, in which the wolf and the 
eagle appeared as the symbols of the “eternal city.” In the exegesis of Emperor Julian (Hymn to King 
Helios, 154b) the wolf was associated with the solar principle in its regal aspect. The double meaning of 
the symbol of the wolf is but an example of the degeneration of an older cult, the symbols of which take 
on a negative meaning in the following age. The wolf—in the Nordic tradition—that was related to the 
primordial, warrior element takes on a negative meaning when this element loses control and becomes 
unleashed. 

10. This bridge, which recalls the “pontifical” symbol mentioned in chapter 1, collapses when Muspell’s sons 
“go and ride it”; the lord of Muspell is vSurtr, who comes from the south to battle the Aesir. Thus, we have 
yet another mention of a southern location from which destructive forces will descend upon the world. 


220 


221 



Gehesis mid Face op the ITIoderei UJorld 


The Cycles of Decadence and the Heroic Cycle 


the ancient authority of the “feminine” or lunar principle against the male revolt and 
usurpation; this attempt, though, was carried out on the same plane as the violent 
masculine affirmation and in so doing it lost that spiritual element that alone estab¬ 
lished the primacy and the dignity of the Demetrian principle. Whether or not 
Amazonism enjoyed a historical and social reality, it is found throughout myths with 
constant traits, thus rendering it susceptible of characterizing analogically a certain 
type of civilization. 

Thus, it is possible to prescind from the real appearance of women warriors in 
history or prehistory and understand Amazonism as the symbol of the reaction of a 
“lunar*’ or priestly spirituality (the feminine dimension of the spirit) that was unable 
to oppose the material or even temporal power (the masculine dimension of the 
spirit, which no longer acknowledged its laws, as for instance in the myth of the 
Titans) in any way other than in a material and temporal fashion, that is, by adopting 
the way of being of its opposite (the virile figure and strength of the “Amazon”). 
Thus, it is possible to refer to what I previously said concerning the alteration of the 
normal relationship between royalty and priesthood. In the abovementioned gener¬ 
alization there is Amazonism wherever there are priests who do not yearn to be 
kings, but rather to dominate kings. 

There is a very revealing legend according to which the Amazons, who attempted 
in vain to conquer the symbolical “White Island” (the leuke island, which has an 
equivalent in several traditions), did not flee at the sight of a Titan-like figure, but 
rather at the sight of a hero: Achilles. They were also fought by other heroes such as 
Theseus, who can be considered the founder of the virile state of Athens, and by 
Bellerophon. The Amazons, who had usurped the Hyperborean battle-axe, came to 
the rescue of Venus’s city, Troy, against the Achaeans; they were eventually exter¬ 
minated by another hero, Heracles, the rescuer of Prometheus. Heracles grabbed 
from their queen the symbolic belt of Ares-Mars and the axe (Aa/3pt)g) that was the 
symbol of the supreme power of the Lydian dynasty of the Heraclideans. 11 The 
meaning of Amazonism versus “Olympian” heroism will be discussed further on. 

A second type of civilization must also be considered. The pair always come 
first. There is, however, a crisis, and the feminine primacy is upheld through a new 
principle, the Aphrodistic principle. The mother is replaced by the hetaera, the son 
by the lover, and the solitary virgin by the divine couple that, as I have suggested, in 
various mythologies often characterizes a compromise between two opposite cults. 
But the woman in this context (unlike in the Olympian synthesis) is not Hera, who 
was subordinated to Zeus although always scheming behind his back; we do not 

H, In the Germanic sagas the same theme appeared in the conflict between the original figure of Brunhild, 
queen of the island, and Siegfried, who defeated her. 


even have, as in the Far Eastern synthesis, the yang principle that retains its active 

and heavenly character vis-a-vis the yin principle, which is its feminine and earthly 
complement. 

Instead, the chthomc and infernal nature penetrates the virile principle and low- 
eis it to a phallic level. The woman now dominates man as he becomes enslaved 
to the senses and a mere instrument of procreation. Vis-h-vis the Aphrodistic god¬ 
dess, the divine male is subjected to the magic of the feminine principle and is re¬ 
duced to the likes of an earthly demon or a god of the fecundating waters—in other 
words, to an insufficient and dark power. From this theme derive, analogically and 
according to different adaptations, types of civilization that may be called Aphrodistic. 
This could be yetanothermeaningofthe theory of eros that Plato associated with the 
myth of the androgynous beings whose power was shattered when they became 
two, male and female. Sexual love arises between mortal beings from the deep- 
seated desire ol the fallen male who realizes his inner insufficiency and who seeks, 
in the fulgurating ecstasis of orgasm, to reascend to the wholeness of the primordial 
“androgynous” state. In this sense, the erotic experience conceals a variation in the 
theme of the rebellion of the Titans with the only difference being that, due to its own 
nature, it takes place under the aegis of the feminine principle. It is easy to remark 
that a principle of ethical decadence and corruption must necessarily be connected 
with a civilization oriented in this sense, as it is apparent in the various festivals that 
up to relatively recent times were inspired by Aphroditism. If Mouru, the third cre¬ 
ation of Ahura Mazda, which most likely corresponds to Atlantis, is seen as the 
Demetrian civilization, then the notion that the god of darkness set up various sins 12 
as some kind of countercreation may refer to the following period of Aphrodistic 
degeneration in that civilization that is parallel to the Titanic upheaval itself; this is 
true especially if we consider the frequent associations between Aphrodistic god¬ 
desses and violent and brutally warlike divine figures. 

It is well known that Plato established a hierarchy of the forms of eros, rising 
from the sensual and the profane up to the peaks of the sacred 13 and culminating in 
the eros through which “the mortal seeks to live forever and to become immortal.” 14 
In Dionysism, eros becomes “sacred frenzy,” mystic orgiasm; it is the highest possi¬ 
bility inherent in this direction and it is aimed at undoing the bonds of matter and at 
producing a transfiguration through frenzy, excess, and ecstasis. 15 But if the symbol 
of Dionysus, who fights against the Amazons himself, reveals the highest ideal of 

12. Such as unbelief, pride, sodomy, burial of the dead, witchcraft, and cremation. Vendidad, 1.12. 

13. Plato, Symposium, 14-15; 26-29; Phaedrus, 244-45; 251—57b. 

14. Symposium, 26. 

15. For an in-depth analysis of this positive possibility of human sexuality, see my Eros and die Mysteries of 
Love. 


222 


223 



Genesis AOD Face of the IHodemi UJorld 


Tne Cycles of Decadence and the Heroic Cycle 


this spiritual world, nevertheless it remains something inferior compared to what the 
third possibility of the new era will be: the heroic reintegration that alone is really 
detached from both the feminine and the telluric principle. 16 In fact, Dionysus was 
also represented as a demon of the infernal regions (“Hades is the same as Dionysus” 
said Herac] itus 17 ), and was often associated with the principle of the waters (Poseidon) 
or with the underground fire (Hephaestus). Often he is found together with feminine 
figures of mothers, virgins, or goddesses of nature turned into lovers: Demeter and 
Core, Ariadne and Aridela, Semelis and Libera. The masculinity of the Corybantes, 
who often dressed as women, like the priests in the Phrygian cult of the Mother, was 
very ambiguous. The ecstatic and pantheistic orientation, associated with the sexual 
element, predominates in the Mystery or in the “sacred orgy”; frenzied contacts with 
the occult forces of the earth and maenadic and pandemic liberations occur in a 
domain that is simultaneously that of unrestrained sex, night, and death. If in Rome 
the Bacchanalia were originally celebrated by women and if in the Dionysian Mys¬ 
teries women could play the role of priestesses and initiators; and if historically all 
the memories of Dionysian epidemics are essentially to be attributed to the feminine 
element—in all this we have a clear indication of the survival during this cycle too, 
of the theme of the woman’s preeminence, not only in the coarsely Aphrodistic stage 
(in which she dominates through the bond that eros in its carnal form imposes upon 
phallic man), but also as the woman inducing an ecstasis that may also signify disso¬ 
lution, destruction of the form, and therefore, attainment of the spirit, but only on 
condition of the renunciation of its possession in a virile form. 

The third and last type of civilization to be considered is the civilization of the 
heroes. Hesiod mentions that following the Bronze Age and prior to the Iron Age, Zeus 
created a better lineage out of those races whose destiny was “to descend ingloriously 
to Hades.” Hesiod called this lineage the race of “heroes” to whom it is given the pos¬ 
sibility of attaining immortality and partaking, despite all, in a state similar to that of 
the primordial age. 18 In this type of civilization we find evidence of the attempt to re¬ 
store the tradition of the origins on the basis of the warrior principle and of member¬ 
ship in the warrior caste. Indeed not all the “heroes” become immortal by escaping 
Hades; this is the fate of only some of them. And if we examine the body of Hellenic 

) 6. Bachofen identified three stages in the cult of Dionysus that represent this god respectively as a chthonic 
being, a lunar nature, and a luminous god associated with Apollo, although with an Apollo conceived as 
the sun subject to change and passions. In this latter aspect Dionysus may fall into the group of heroes 
who vanquished the Amazons. More than in the Thracian-Hellenic myth, however, the highest possibility 
of the Dionysian principle was upheld in the Indo-Aryan myth of the soma, a heavenly and lunar principle 
that induces a divine intoxication (mada) and that is related with the regal animal, the eagle, and with a 
struggle against female demons. 

17. Heraclitus, frag, B15 Diehl. 

18. Hesiod, Works and Days, 156-73. 


myths and the myths of other traditions, upon recognizing the affinity—hidden behind 
various symbols—of the deeds of the Titans with those of the heroes, we will realize 
that the hero and the Titans, after all, belong to the same stock; they are the daring ones 
who undertook the same transcendent adventure, which can either fail or succeed. The 
heroes who become immortal are those whose adventure succeeds; in other words, they 
correspond to those who are really capable of overcoming, thanks to an inner impulse 
toward transcendence, tire deviation proper to the Titanic attempt to restore the primor¬ 
dial spiritual virility and the supremacy over the woman, that is, over the lunar spirit, 
both Aphrodistic and Amazonian; conversely, the other heroes, those who are not ca¬ 
pable of realizing such a possibility conferred upon them by the Olympian principle, 
or Zeus—the same possibility to which Jesus referred when he said (Matt. 11:2): “The 
kingdom of heaven has been subject to violence and the violent are taking it by 
stonn” |,) — descend to the same level as the race of the Titans and of the Giants, who 
were cursed with various punishments and afflictions as a result of their boldness and 
their corruption (of which they were guilty) in the “ways of the flesh on earth.” As far 
as these relationships between the way of the Titans and that of the heroes is concerned, 
there is an interesting myth according to which once Prometheus was freed, he taught 
Heracles the way to reach the Garden of the Hesperides, where he would find the fruit 
that renders one immortal. Such a fruit, once obtained by Heracles, is taken back by 
Athena, who represents in this context the Olympian intellect, and put back “so that it 
may not be partaken of by anybody”;- 0 this probably means that the attainment of that 
fruit should be reserved for the stock to which it belongs and that it should not be des¬ 
ecrated by putting it at the disposal of the human race, as Prometheus intended to do. 

Even in the heroic cycle we sometimes find the theme of the dyad, that is, of the 
pair, and of the Woman, but with a different meaning from that of the cases I dis¬ 
cussed in the first part concerning the saga of the Rex Nemorensis, the “women” 
who appoint divine kings, the “women” of the chiva lrous cycle, and so on. Concern¬ 
ing this different aspect, in which the same symbolism will appear to function differ¬ 
ently, here it will suffice to say that the woman who embodies a vivifying principle 
(such as Eve, the “Living Woman,” Hebe, and what derives from the relation of the 
divine women with the Tree of Life, etc.); or a principle of transcendent or enlighten¬ 
ing wisdom (such as Athena, bom from the mind of the Olympian Zeus, Heracles’ 
guide; or the virgin Sophia, or the Lady Intelligence of the medieval “Love’s Lieges,” 
etc.); or a power (such as the Hindu saktis, the goddess of the Morrigu’s battles who 

19. During his quest for the gift of everlasting life, the Chaldean hero Gilgntnesh uses violence and threatens 
to knock down the door of the garden filled with "divine trees.” A feminine figure, Sabitu, had closed this 
door to him. 

20. Apollodonis, Bibi, 2.122. 


224 


225 


Genesis hod Face of the fHoD«n UJorld 


The Cycles of Decadence and the Heroic Cvcle 


offers her love to solar heroes of the Celtic Ulster Cycle, etc,)—is the object of 
conquest, and does not take from the hero his virile character, but allows him to 
integrate it on a higher plane. A relevant motif in the cycles of the heroic type is that 
of the opposition to any gynaecocratic claim and to any Amazonian attempt to usurp 
power. This motif, together with the previous one, which is equally essential for a 
definition of the notion of “hero” and refers to an alliance with the Olympian prin¬ 
ciple and a struggle against the Titanic principle, had a very clear expression in the 
Hellenic cycle, especially in the figure of the Doric Heracles. 

We have already seen that Heracles, like Theseus, Bellerophon, and Achilles, 
fights against the Amazons and eventually exterminates them. Though the Lydian 
Heracles falls for Omphale, the Doric Heracles proves to be a true juiadyvvog, an 
enemy of women. Since his birth, Hera, the earth goddess, is hostile to him; while 
still in his cradle he choked two snakes she had sent to kill him. Heracles has con¬ 
stantly to battle Hera without winning, but succeeds instead in wounding her and in 
taking her only daughter Hebe, the “perennial youth,” If we consider other figures of 
this cycle in both East and West, we will always find these fundamental themes. 
Thus Apollo, whose birth had been prevented many times by Hera (it is significant 
that she was helped in this by Ares, the violent god of war), who had sent the serpent 
Python to kill him, eventually has to fight against Tatius, Hera’s son, who can count 
on his mother’s protection. In the ensuing struggle she is wounded by the Hyperborean 
hero, just like in the epic tale Aphrodite is wounded by Ajax. As uncertain as the 
final outcome may be of the saga of Gilgamesh, the Chaldean hero who set out to 
find the plant of immortality, the bottom line is that his story is the account of the 
struggle he waged against the goddess Ishtar, an Aphrodistic type of the Mother of 
Life. He turned her love down, reminding her of the fate of her former lovers; he 
finally slew the demonic animal that the goddess unleashed against him. In one of 
his actions that is considered “heroic and virile,” Indra, who is the heavenly proto¬ 
type of the hero, strikes the Amazonian and heavenly woman Usas with his thunder¬ 
bolt while being at the same time the Lord of Sakti, whose name also means “power.” 
And if Parsifal’s departure caused his mother, who opposed his heroic vocation as a 
“heavenly knight,” 21 to die of grief; and if the Persian hero Rostam, according to the 
Shannmi, must thwart the plot of the dragon that approached him in the disguise of a 
seductive woman before freeing a blind king who, thanks to Rostam, gains his sight 
back and is revealed to be the one who attempted to ascend to heaven with the help 
of “eagles”—in all this we find the same theme over and over again. 

21. In the saga of the Grail, the sacred “heroic” type corresponds to the one who can sit in the empty place in 
the assembly of the knights without being struck by lightning. 


Generally speaking, the seductive snares of a woman who tries to distract from 
a symbolic feat a hero who is conceived of as a slayer of Titans, monstrous beings, or 
rebellious warriors, or as a conqueror abiding by a higher law, is such a recurrent and 
popular theme as not to require individual examples. The element in these legends 
and sagas that must be firmly upheld, however, is that the woman’s snares can be 
reduced to the plane of the flesh in the lowest sense of the word. If it is true that 
woman brings death and that man overcomes her through the spirit by passing from 
the phallic to the spiritual plane of virility, it must be added that the plot devised by 
the woman, or by the goddess, expresses in esoteric terms the snare represented by 
a form of spirituality that emasculates and tends to paralyze or to thwart any impulse 
toward the supernatural. 

Lordship over the origins; not to be the original force but to possess it; the quality 
of the awo0u?fe [to be a light unto oneself] and of the amoxeXeoroq [to have 
oneself as an end], which in Hellas was often associated with the heroic ideal— 
these qualities have sometimes been represented through the symbolism of parri¬ 
cide or of incest; parricide in the sense of an emancipation, and of becoming one’s 
own guiding principle; incest in an analogous sense, conveying the idea of possess¬ 
ing the prime generating matter. 

Thus, as a reflection of the same spirit in the world of the gods, we find, for 
instance, the type of Zeus who killed his own father and possessed his mother Rhea, 
when in order to run away from him, she took the form of a snake. Indra himself, just 
like Apollo, who had killed the snake Python, slew the primordial serpent Alii; he too 
was believed to have killed his heavenly father Dyaus. Even in the symbolism of the 
Hermetic Ars Regia we find the theme of the “philosophical incest.” 22 

With regard to the two accounts of the solar symbolism previously employed to 
point out the differentiation of traditions, we may generally assume that the heroic 
myth is related to the sun, which is associated with a principle of change, not with 
change as such—as in the destiny of caducity and perennial redissolution into Mother 
Earth typical of the year-god—but in a way that tends to become free from this 
principle in order to become transfigured and reintegrated into an Olympian immu¬ 
tability and into a Uranian immortal nature. 

The heroic civilizations that arose prior to the Iron Age (an age deprived of 
every real spiritual principle) and around the time of the Bronze Age, and that over¬ 
came both the Demetrian-Aphrodistic spirituality and the Titanic hubris thus bring¬ 
ing about the end of the Amazonian upheavals, represent partial resurrections of the 
Northern Light as well as instances of restoration of the golden Arctic cycle. It is 

22. See J. Evola, The Hermetic Trndition, chap. 19. 


226 


227 



Gehesis bod Face of the Modem World 


very significant that among the feats that bestowed Olympian immortality upon 
Heracles we find the adventure of the Garden of the Hesperides. According to some 
traditions, in order to reach that garden Heracles went through the symbolic northern 
center “which neither ship nor marching feet may find,” 2 - 1 namely, the land of the 
Hyperboreans. Then Heracles, the “handsome victor” (xaXXiviKOq), was believed 
to have carried away from this land the green olive leaf with which victors are 
crowned. 24 

In summary, I have reached a morphological determination of six basic types of 
civilization and tradition that came after the primordial one (the Golden Age). These 
are: Demetrism, representing the pure Southern Light (the Silver Age, Atlantic cycle, 
societies ruled by a priestly caste); Aphroditism as a degenerated version of 
Demetrism; and finally Amazonism, which was a deviated attempt at lunar restora¬ 
tion. On the other hand, we find Titanism (in a different, almost Luciferian context), 
which was a degeneration of the Northern Light (the Bronze Age, age of warriors 
and giants); Dionysism, as a deviated and emasculated masculine spirituality gener¬ 
ating passive and promiscuous forms of ecstasis; 25 and finally, Heroism, as the resto¬ 
ration of the Olympian-solar spirituality and the overcoming of both the Mother and 
Titan figures. These are the fundamental structures to which, generally speaking, we 
can analytically reduce any mixed form of civilization arising in historical times 
during the cycle of the Dark Age or Age of Iron. 


Solar Spirituality 


Arctic Cycle of the Golden Age—Cycle of Divine Regality 


Demetrian Spirituality 
Southern-Atlantic Cycle 
Silver Age 

Priestly Gynaecocracy 

i 

Amazonian Cycle 


Aphrodistic Cycle 

Heroic Spirituality 
Aryan Cycle 

I ' 

Twilight of the Heroes 

Iron Age 


Titanic Cycle 
Bronze Age 
Second Atlantic Period 

i 

Dionysian Cycle 


Iron Age 


23. Pindar, The Pythian Odes, 10.2, 

24. Pindar, The Olympian Odes, 3. 

25. Ins important to distinguish the valid elements that Dionysism may contain in the context of the so-called 
Way ol the Left Hand (in relation to a special initiatory use of sex), from the meaning that Dionysism has 
in (he context of a morphology of civilizations. 


228 


229 



TRADITION MID flnTITRflDITIOn 


29 


Tradition and Antitradition 


The American Cycle and 
the Eastern Mediterranean Cycle 

"P or obvious reasons I cannot include in the present work a metaphysics of history 
A of the main ancient civilizations. I will limit myself to pointing out some of their 
most characteristic aspects and meanings, thus providing a common thread to those 
who want to pursue their own special research in any one of them. 

In any event, my scope will be confined to the Western world, since outside our 
hemisphere the great majority of civilizations retained, in one way or another and 
until recent times, a traditional character (“traditional” in the widest sense of the 
term, which includes all of the previously described forms of civilization and associ¬ 
ates them in a common opposition to the “humanist” cycle of the last ages), which 
they eventually lost due to the eroding action exercised upon them by Western coun¬ 
tries that had themselves fallen victim to a degenerative process. Thus, in order to 
understand the processes that played a decisive role in the genesis of the modem 
world, it is necessary to look at the West. 

The traces of the Northern and solar spirituality can be found in historical 
times mainly in the area of the Aryan civilizations. Considering the abuse that has 
been made of the term aryan in some contemporary milieus, such a term should 
be used with some reservations; in other words, it should not be made to corre¬ 
spond to a merely biological or ethnic concept (in this regard it would be more 
appropriate to talk about a boreal or Northem-Atlantic race, depending on the 
case at hand), but rather to the concept of a race of the spirit, whose correspon¬ 
dence to a physical race has varied from one civilization to another. “Aryan” 
corresponds more or less to “heroic”; the connection with the origins still exists as 
a dimmed legacy, but the decisive element is the tendency toward inner liberation 
and the reintegration in an active and combative form. The fact that in India the 


term aiya was the synonym of dvija, “twice-born” or “regenerated,” supports this 
point 1 

Concerning the area proper to the Aryan civilization there is the interesting 
testimony of the Aitareya Brahamana. This text relates that the struggle between the 
deva, the luminous deities, and the a sura, the enemies of the divine heroes, began in 
the four regions of space. The region in which the deva triumphed and that received 
the name of sa-esa dig aparajita, or “unconquered region,” was the region situated 
between North and East, which corresponds to the direction of the Northem-Atlantic 
migration. On the other hand, the South has been considered in India as the region 
inhabited by demons, by the forces hostile to the gods and to the ary as; the “southern 
fire,” of the ritual of three fires is aimed at exorcising these forces. 2 As far as the 
Western world is concerned, a reference can be made to the so-called battle-axe 
cultures that are usually associated with the megalithic culture of the dolmen. To the 
profane sciences, the original seat of these races still remains sluouded in mystery, 
like the seat of the first races that were clearly superior to Neanderthal man and who 
have been called the “Greeks of the Paleolithic.” There is a connection between the 
appearance of the “battle-axe cultures” of the Neolithic and the more recent expan¬ 
sion of the Indo-European populations (“Aryans”) in Europe; they are believed to 
have originated the political and military institutions and forms of government that 
opposed the Demetrian, peaceful, communitarian, and priestly type of culture and 
that often replaced it. 3 

Other civilizations in addition to the Aryan ones have displayed traces of the 
primordial tradition up to historical times. To follow closely the interplay of the two 
opposite themes of South and North, however, with reference to an ethnic element, 
would take us too far afield and cause us to formulate uncertain hypotheses. 

In any event, with regard to pre-Columbian America, we must consider first of 
all the archaic substratum of a telluric, Southern cycle of civilization related to the 
Atlantean cycle. In this cycle we find the civilizations of the Maya, the Tiahuanac, 
and the Pueblo as well those of other stocks or minor centers; its traits are very 
similar to those that can be found in the prehistoric traces of some sort of Southern 
belt extending from the Pelasgian Mediterranean to the vestiges of the pre-Aryan 
civilization of Mohenjo-Daro (India) and to analogous traces in predynastic China. 

Such a civilization is prevalently of a Demetrian, priestly type; solar symbols 

1. For an overview of the notion of “Aryan,” see my Sintesi di dottrinzi deflu rnzzn, 

2. In the Rg Veda the South is the direction of the sacrifice performed in honor of the forefathers (pitf-yRna); 
conversely, the North is the direction of the sun and of the gods (devx-yann). 

3. C. Dawson, The Age of the Gods. 


230 


231 



Gehejii nriD Face of the Modem UJorld 


TmDITIOD ODD flllTITMDITIOn 


survive together with a strong chthonic component, though in altered and weakened 
forms, so much so that one would search in vain for elements that are traceable to the 
principle of spiritual virility and Olympian superiority. This applies also to the civili¬ 
zation of the Maya where we find prominent figures of priests and deities who assume 
the insignia of supreme sovereignty and royalty. There is a very characteristic Mayan 
figure in the Dresden Codex of the god Kukulc&n, adorned with the insignia of royalty 
and with a priestkneeling before him, performing a bloody and mortifying ritual on him¬ 
self. TheDemetrian principle thus leads to forms of a “religious’* type, in which fasts 
and bodily mortifications characterize the fall of man from his original dignity. Though 
the Maya built an empire called “the Kingdom of the Great Snake” (nachan was a 
frequent and highly representative symbol of this civilization), it had a peaceful rather 
than a warrior and heroic character; the priestly sciences were highly developed, but 
once the empire reached a high stage of opulence, it slowly but increasingly degener¬ 
ated into the forms of a hedonistic and Aphrodistic civilization. It seems that among the 
Maya originated the figure of the god Quetzalcoatl, who was a solar Atlantean god who 
came to be worshiped in an emasculated type of cult that was of a peaceful, contem¬ 
plative, and self-mortifying nature. According to a tradition, one day Quetzalcoatl left 
his subjects and withdrew to the Atlantic seat whence he had come. 

This should probably be related to the invasions of the races of the Nahuatlans, 
Toltecs, and finally of the Aztecs who overcame the Maya and their crepuscular civi¬ 
lization, forming new states. These are races that retain in a more distinct way the 
memory of Tula and Aztlan, that is, of the Northem-Atlantic seat, and thus can be 
considered part of a “heroic” cycle. Their last creation was the ancient Mexican 
empire, the capital of which (Tenochtitlan), according to a legend, was built on the 
site of an apparition of an eagle holding in its claws a snake. The same can be said of 
those Inca stocks who were sent as conquerors by the “sun” and who created the Pe¬ 
ruvian empire after subjugating races of lower types of civilizations and their ani¬ 
mistic and chthonic cults (which had survived in the lowest strata of society).*' There 
is a very interesting legend about the race of the giants of Tiuhanac—whose heaven 
included only the moon (lunar cycle with its Titanic counterpart)—a race that killed 
the Sun’s prophet only to be massacred and turned into stone by the ensuing appari¬ 
tion of the Sun; this legend can be related to the advent of the Incas. Generally speak¬ 
ing, there are numerous legends concerning the American white stocks of supernatu¬ 
ral conquerors credited with creating various civilizations. 5 In Mexico, the following 

4. According to an Inca law, every new king had the duty to increase the size of the empire and to replace the 
indigenous cults with the solar cult. 

5. See L. Spence, The Mythologies of Ancient Mexico and Peru (London. 1914). Analogous legends are 
found in North America too, From scientific researches on the blood types applied to the problem of the 
race, it seems that among the Indians of North America and the Pueblos the blood remnants arc more 
similar than that between Scandinavian people. 


pahs of contrasting elements are very revealing: (1) a solar calendar opposed to a 
lunai one, which apparently belonged to the more ancient stratum of the aboriginal 
civilization and was mainly employed by the priestly caste; (2) an aristocratic and 
hereditary system of property that was opposed to a communist, plebeian type; and 
finally, (3) the opposition between the cult of fierce warrior deities, such as 
Uitzilopochtli and Tezcatlipoca, and the surviving traces of the cult of Quetzalcoatl. 
In the most distant memories of these civilizations we find again—as in the Edda — 
the theme of the struggle against the giants and a recent generation affected by the 
Flood. At the time of the Spanish invasion, the warrior civilization of these races 
showed a characteristic degeneration in the direction of a special and sinister version 
of Dionysism, which may be called frenzy of blood. The themes of holy war and he¬ 
roic death as a sacrifice that confers immortality, which were found among the Az¬ 
tecs as well as among northern European stocks or Arab people, in Central and South 
American civilizations were mixed with some kind of frenzy of human sacrifices; 
these sacrifices, even in the form of collective slaughters, were performed in order to 
maintain contact with the divine but with a dark, fierce exaltation derived from de¬ 
stroying life, the likeness of which is to be found nowhere else in the world. 

As in the case of the Incan empire, other factors of a general degeneration coupled 
with internal political strife brought about the collapse of Mexican civilizations— 
which undoubtedly had a glorious and solar past—at the hands of a few groups of 
European adventurers. The vital and inner potential of these cycles had been de¬ 
pleted for a long time, and thus we cannot verify any subsistence or revival of the 
ancient spirit in the times following the conquest. 

Nevertheless, morainic fragments of the ancient heritage endured for a longer 
time in the spirit and in the race of some North American stocks. In these tribes too, 
the heroic element was altered, thus generating forms of unprecedented cruelty and 
harshness. Nevertheless, lor the most part, it is possible to subscribe to the view of 
Frithjof Schuon, who spoke about the 

singularly complete human type of the American Indian: his dignity, 
his pride, his moral uprightness and strength, his generosity and his hero¬ 
ism, which are all dimensions of an inner beauty represented both by 
the sun and by the eagle, command our respect and bespeak a spiritual¬ 
ity without which these virtues would appear unintelligible and lacking 
a sufficient reason . 6 

A similar situation can be verified during the late Neolithic in Europe, with regard to 
warrior stocks that may appear somewhat barbaric when compared to the societies 

6. F. Schuon, Etudes traditionneiles (1949), 3.64. 


232 


233 



Genesis mid Face of the Modem UJorld 


TrODITIOO NOD flnTITRETDITIOn 


of a Demetrian and priestly type that they swept away, subdued, or absorbed. In 
these stocks, notwithstanding a certain involution, there are visible traces of the for¬ 
mative action of the previous cycle of Nordic spirituality; this is also the case, as I 
will try to document, of the epigones of several northern people during the age of the 
invasions. 

As far as China is concerned, the ritual retained traces of an ancient dynastic 
transmission following the feminine line that was radically opposed to the spirit of 
the cosmocratic view, according to which the emperor embodied both the functions 
of male and of pole vis-a-vis the forces of the demos and of the world, and the spirit 
of one of the most rigorous types of paternal right ever seen. Even the recently dis¬ 
covered vestiges of a civilization similar to that of the Maya, which had a linear type 
of writing and was considered to be the unsuspected underground and most archaic 
stratum of the Chinese civilization, seem to suggest that a Demetrian-Atlantean phase 7 
was followed by a solar cycle (how such a thing could have happened still needs to 
be determined) that was not able to erase all of its traces. We find an echo of this 
phase in the following elements: (1) those metaphysical views that show traces of 
the archaic idea in the assimilation of “Heaven” to a woman or mother, which was 
conceived as the original source of life; (2) the frequent recurrence of the primacy of 
the “left” over the “right” and in the opposition between a lunar and a solar calendar; 
(3) the telluric element of the popular cult of demons; (4) the shamanic ritual with its 
disorderly and frenzied expressions; and finally, (5) the practice of magical tech¬ 
niques, which were originally the almost exclusive prerogative of women, in opposi¬ 
tion to the nonmystical and almost Olympian austerity of the official Chinese patri¬ 
cian and imperial religion. From an ethnical perspective, in the Far Eastern regions 
it is possible to recognize the encounter of two opposite currents: the first, which 
came from the North, was endowed with the characteristics of Ural-Altaic popula¬ 
tions (in which there was a strong Aryan component), while the second originated in 
southeastern and austral regions. The periods in which the elements of the first cur- 
rentpredominated, also corresponded to the periods of China’s greatness; these times 
were characterized by a marked propensity toward war and by territorial expansion, 
both of which played a similar role in the Japanese cycle. An in-depth investigation 
would easily bring similar data to light. In ancient China the polar symbol of central¬ 
ity played a prominent role; it was connected both to the view of the Middle Empire, 
which was underlined by local geographic elements, and to the recurrence of the 
ideas of the “middle way” and of “equilibrium” in views that influenced the ethical 

7. See H. Schmidt, Pnihistorisches aus Ostasicn (1924), concerning the possibility of civilizing actions of a 
Western origin during the Neolithic in China. 


plane and that originated a special (clear and ritualistic) attitude toward life. Just like 
in ancient Rome, the Chinese representatives of power embodied a religious type 
too: the type of the “priest” appeared only in a later period and in relation to exog¬ 
enous cults. The foundation of the Chinese wisdom tradition, namely the I Ching, 
was attributed to a mythical king, Fo-hi, just like the main commentaries to this text 
were believed to have been written by princes and nobles rather than priests. Tire 
teachings found therein—which according to Fo-hi himself are traceable to a very 
ancient and not easily individuated past—were the common foundation of two more 
recent doctrines (Taoism and Confucianism) that seem to have very little in com¬ 
mon, considering the different dimensions they address. These two doctrines repre¬ 
sented a spiritual revival in a period of latent crisis and sociopolitical disintegration; 
Taoism contributed to the revival of the metaphysical element through initiatory and 
esoteric developments, while Confucianism helped to revive the ethical and ritualis¬ 
tic element. Thus, a regular traditional continuity was preserved in China in stable 
forms until relatively recent times. 

The same holds true for Japan. Its traditional national form, Shintoism, exempli¬ 
fies an influence that rectified and raised to a higher level, a cultural milieu that 
partially derived from a primitive stratum (nothing relevant can be deduced from the 
presence of the isolated white stock of the Ainu). In historical times, at the heart of 
Shintoism we find the imperial idea and the identification of the imperial tradition 
with the divine tradition. “Obeying a command, I have descended from heaven,” it 
says in the Ko-gi-ki about the founding father of the Japanese imperial dynasty. In a 
commentary by the prince Hakabon Itoe it is said: 

The sacred throne was created when Earth became separated from 
Heaven [that is, at the time of the dissolution of the primordial unity of 
the earthly and the divine realities—an echo of which is also found in 
the Chinese tradition; thus, quite often the ideograms representing “na¬ 
ture” and “heaven” are synonymous]. The Emperor descends from 
heaven; he is divine and sacred. 

To the emperor was also attributed a “solar” principle, though with a confusing trans¬ 
position of the feminine principle: his descendence came from the goddess Amaterasu 
Omikami. 

On this basis the act of governing and of dominating formed one thing with the 
cult—the term matsuiigoto signifies both government and “pursuit of religious af¬ 
fairs”; in the context of Shintoism, loyalty—unwavering faithfulness to the ruler (ciu- 
ghi )—assumed a religious meaning and was at the basis of its ethics. Any reprehen¬ 
sible, low, or criminal deed was not thought of as a transgression of an abstract, 


234 


235 



Geiiem RnD Pace of the IHoderfi UJorld 


“social” Jaw, but rather as a betrayal, an act of disloyalty, and a disgrace: there were 
no “guilty” people in Japan, but rather “traitors,” or people without honor. 

These general values received a particular emphasis in the warrior nobility (bushi 
or samurai) and in its ethics (the bushido). The orientation of tradition in Japan was 
essentially active and even militaristic, but its counterpart consisted of an inner for¬ 
mation—the samurai’s ethics had a warrior and ascetical character—and also sa¬ 
cred and ritual features; it remarkably resembled the elements typical of the feudal 
and knightly European Middle Ages. Besides Shintoism, Zen, which is an esoteric 
form of Buddhism, played a role in the formation of the samurai and also in the 
traditional formation of various aspects and customs of Japanese life, including the 
arts and crafts; the presence of sects that have practiced Buddhism in its most recent, 
weakened, and religious forms, such as Amidism (a devotional version of Buddhism), 
have not substantially modified the predominant character of the Japanese spirit. In 
Japan, together with bushido we also find the traditional idea of the warrior’s sacri¬ 
ficial death, exemplified by the kamikaze, the suicide pilots of World War II. 

Until recently, Japan has offered an example, unique in its kind, of the coexist¬ 
ence of a traditional orientation with the adoption, on a material plane, of the struc¬ 
tures of modem technological society. In the aftermath of World War II, a millenary 
continuity was shattered and an equilibrium lost, thus marking the disappearance of 
the last state in the world that still recognized the principle of the “solar” regality of 
pure divine right. Because of the “Dark Age” and its laws, wherein technological 
and industrial potential as well as organized material power play a decisive role in 
the clash of world powers, the fate of this tradition has been sealed with the outcome 
of the last war. 

As far as Egypt is concerned, it is possible to gather some data on the primordial 
history of its ci vilization. The tradition relative to a very ancient dynasty of “divine 
departed ones,” who are confused with so-called Followers of the Ancient Horus 
(Shemsu Heru) and represented by the hieroglyphic of Osiris as the Lord of the 
“Sacred Western Land” and who was believed to have come from the West, 8 may 
reflect the memory of a primordial civilizing and conquering Atlantic stock. Accord¬ 
ing to the title bestowed on divine kings, Horus is a god made of gold, like Apollo; in 
other words, he is connected to the primordial tradition. In Egypt we also find the 
symbolism of the “two” inimical brothers, Osiris and Set, and of their struggle. In the 
Egyptian tradition there is some evidence that would allow us to see in this struggle 
an ethnical counterpart, namely, the struggle between two stocks that at that time 
represented the spirit symbolized by each god. While Osiris’s death at the hands of 
Set, in addition to the “sacrificial” meaning I discussed in the first part of this work, 

8. E. A. Wallis Budge, Egypt in the Neolithic and Archaic Periods (London, 1902), 164-65. 


may express on the historical plane a crisis that brought an end to the first age, called 
“Age of the gods,” (Oeolf —Osiris’s resurrection as Horus could represent a restora¬ 
tion connected to the second Egyptian age, which the Greeks called “Age of the 
fj/uiOeoid which corresponds to one of the forms of the “heroic” cycle mentioned by 
Hesiod. According to Tradition, this second age ended with Manes; the title Hor aha, 
“fighting Horus,” which was bestowed on this king, may underscore this meaning. 

The crisis that was initially overcome by the ancient Egyptians, however, must 
have reemerged later on with disaggregating results. One of the indications of this 
crisis is the democratization of the notion of immortality, which can be observed as 
early as the end of the Ancient Empire (Sixth Dynasty); another sign of this crisis is 
the alteration in the character of spiritual centrality and in the “immanent transcen¬ 
dence” of the pharaoh, who tends to become a mere representative of the deity. In 
later times we can witness in Egypt, in addition to the presence of the solar theme, 
the emergence of the chthonic, lunar theme, which was connected with the figure of 
Isis, the “Mother of all things,” or the “Lady of the elements, who was born at the 
beginning of time.” 10 In this regard, the legend in which Isis, who is conceived as an 
enchantress, wants to become herself “the Ruler of the world and a deity similar to 
the Sun (Ra) both in heaven and on earth,” is highly significant. For this purpose Isis 
ambushed Ra as he sat on the “throne of the two horizons”; she caused a poisonous 
snake to bite him and thus the god allowed his “name” to pass on to her. 

This is how the shift to the civilization of the Mother occurred. From a solar god 
Osiris turned into a lunar god, a god of the waters in a phallic sense, and into a god of 
wine (that is, of the Dionysian element), just as, at the advent of Isis, Horus degener¬ 
ated to a mere symbol of the ephemeral world. 11 The pathos of Osiris’s death and 
resurrection acquires mystical and escapist overtones in radical contrast to the im¬ 
passive solar spirituality of the aristocratic cult of Ra and of “ancient Horus,” Often 
the type of divine woman, of which Isis is an archetype, mediated the resurrection 
and eternal life; these are figures of virgins who carry the lotus symbolizing rebirth 
and the “key of life.” This is reflected in ethics and in social customs in that Isis-like 
predominance of the woman and of the queen that Herodotus and Diodorus ascribed 

9. The tradition reported by Eusebius mentions an interval of time following the “divine” dynasty, which was 
characterized by lunar months. There is also an undeniable relation between Set and the feminine ele¬ 
ment, both because Set was mainly conceived as a female and also because while Isis—who will be the 
chief goddess during the Egyptian decadence—was portrayed in search of the dead Osiris, by disobeying 
Horus she freed Set. See Plutarch, De Iside et Osiride, 13. 

10. Apuleius, Metamorphosis, 11.5. 

11. Plutarch, De hide et Osiride, 33 (Osiris is associated with the waters); 41 (Osiris is associated with the 
lunar world); 33-34 (Osiris is associated with Dionysus and with the moist principle); 42 (Horus is associ¬ 
ated with the terrestrial world). Osiris even came to be regarded as “Hysiris,” namely as the son of [sis 
(34). 


236 


237 



Gehesis mid Face oe the Modem World 


Tmditkm nnD (tammon 


to the more recent Egyptian society and that found a typical expression in the dy¬ 
nasty of the so-called Divine Worshipers of the Nubian period. 12 

It is significant that corresponding to this, the center shifted from the regal to the 
priestly symbol. Around the time of the Twenty-first Dynasty, the Egyptian priests, 
instead of yearning to be at the service of the divine king, attempted to usurp the 
regal power; the Theban dynasty of regal priests was established at the expense of 
the pharaohs. Thus, what emerged was a priestly theocracy in lieu of the divine 
regality of the origins; this was another typical manifestation of the Southern Light. 
From this time on, the gods were regarded increasingly less as embodied presences 
and thus became transcendent beings whose efficacy is essentially mediated by the 
priest. The solar-magical stage declined, followed by a new “religious” stage: prayer 
replaced command; desire and sentimentalism replaced identification and magical 
techniques. For instance, while an ancient Egyptian sorcerer could say: “I am Ammon, 
who fertilizes his Mother. I am the Lord of the Sword, and I possess a great power. 
Do not rise up against me—I am Set! Do not touch me, for I am Horusl”; and while 
a man who had been made into the image of Osiris could say things like: “I arise like 
a living god,” or “I am the Only One; my being is the being of all gods in eternity”; or, 
If the Risen One wishes your death, O gods, you will certainly die; but if he wishes 
you to live, you shall live”; or, “You command the gods”; the last forms of Egyptian 
spirituality are marked by the emergence of the mystical elan and by supplications: 
O Ammon, Lord of the Silent Ones, who heeds the call of the poor ones. I cry out to 
you in my torment. . . Truly you are the savior.” 11 Thus the Egyptian cycle ended 
with a decadence taking place under the aegis of the Mother. According to Greek 
historians, it was from Egypt that the main Demetrian and chthonic cults reached the 
Pelasgians first and the Hellenes later. 14 In any event, Egypt was destined to play a 
role in the interplay of Mediterranean civilizations only as an Isis-type of civilization 
undei the influence of a mostly “lunar” (as the Pythagorean) wisdom. Isis’s and 
Serapis’s mysteries and the royal hetaera Cleopatra were the best Egypt had to offer 
vis-a-vis the onslaught of Roman power. 


12. The relationship was very different in ancient Egyptian society. Trovatorelli ( Civiltn'e Icgislazione 
dell antico Onente, 136-38) mentions the figure of Ra-em-ke; the royal woman is smaller than man, to 
indicate inferiority and submission, and she is represented prostrated behind him. Only in a later period 
Osiris assumed the abovementioned lunar character and Isis appeared as the “Living One" in the eminent 
sense of the word, and as the “mother of the gods." Traces of the earlier period are documented by 
Bachofen (Mmerreclu, 68) and by Herodotus ( The Histories, 2.35), according to whom there were no 
priestesses in the cult of male or female deities. 

13. Texts quoted by K. G. Bittner, A iagie, Mutter ailerKultur (Munich, 1930), 140-43 and by Merezhkovskv 
Mystdres de 1 *Orient , 163. 

14. Herodotus, The Histories, 2.50; 2.171. 


If we go from Egypt to Chaldea and Assyria, we will find an even more distinct 
version of the theme of the Southern civilizations and of their materializations and 
alterations. In the more ancient substratum of those people, which was constituted by 
the Sumerian element, we find the characteristic theme of a primordial heavenly 
Mother ruling over various manifested deities as well as the theme of a “son” whom 
she generates without the need of father; this son was sometimes represented as a 
hero or as a “god” still subject to the law of death and resurrection. In the late Hittite 
civilization the goddess overcame the god and ended up absorbing the attributes of 
the god of war by presenting herself as an Amazonian goddess; in such a civilization 
there were also plenty of eunuch priests and armed priestesses of the Great Goddess. 
Chaldea lacked for the most part the idea of divine regality; with the exception of 
some minor influences from the Egyptian tradition, the Chaldean kings, even when 
they took on a priestly character, acknowledged themselves as being mere “vicars” 
of the deities and shepherds elected to watch over the human flock rather than divine 
natures. In that civilization the god of the city was given the title of king—either “my 
Lord” or “my Lady.” The human king was entrusted by the god to rule over the city 
on his behalf, and was made a prince in the sense of a mere representative. Elis title 
of en was mainly a priestly one: he was the priest, the shepherd, and the vicar. The 
priestly caste remained a separate entity and it eventually ruled over the other castes. 
The yearly humiliation of the king in Babel, when he laid down his regal insignia 
before the statue of the god, put on the robes of a slave, and implored the god’s 
mercy by confessing his “sins,” is characteristic of this dominance; he was even 
flogged by the priest who represented the deity. The Babylonian kings were often 
portrayed as the “Mother’s creation” (Ishtar-Mami); in Hammurabi’s Code the king 
received his crown and scepter from the goddess. Ashurbanipal even said to her: “I 
implore from you the gift of life.” The formula “Omnipotent Queen, merciful protec¬ 
tor, there is no other refuge but Thee” was a characteristic confession of Babylonian 
spirituality and of the pathos with which it approached the sacred. 13 

The Chaldean science that represented the highest aspect of this cycle of civili¬ 
zation, exemplifies for the most part the lunar and Demetrian type; its science of the 
stars, unlike its Egyptian counterpart, was mostly concerned with the planets rather 
than with the fixed stars, and with the moon rather than with the sun (to the Babylonians 
the night was more sacred than the day; Sin, the god of the moon, dominated Shamash, 
the god of the sun). Babylonian astrology was a science heavily influenced by fatal¬ 
ism and the belief in the omnipotence of a cosmic law or “harmony,” and character- 

15. Egypt, unlike Babylon, ignored the notions of “sin” and “repentance"; Egyptians remained standing be¬ 
fore their gods, while Babylonians prostrated themselves. 


238 


239 



Gtntiis mid Face of the Modem LUorld 

ized by little or no sense of an authentic kind of transcendence; in other words, it 
could not prescind from the naturalistic and antiheroic limitation in the dimension of 
the spirit. In the more recent civilization (the Assyrian), which descended from the 
same stock, we find characteristics typical of the Titanic and Aphrodistic cycles. In 
such a civilization, on the one hand we find the emergence of races and virile deities 
of a violent, coarsely sensual, cruel, and bellicose type; on the other hand, we find a 
spirituality culminating in Aphrodistic figurations such as the Great Mothers, to whom 
the male deities were subordinated, Although Gilgamesh represented the heroic, 
solar type who despises the Goddess and attempts to conquer the Tree of Life, his 
attempt failed: upon landing on the symbolic land ruled by Shamashnapishtim (the 
divine hero who survived the Flood), a serpent snatched away from him the gift of 
“perennial youth” that he had obtained (although with the intercession of a woman, 
the “Virgin of the Seas") and that he intended to bring back to men, “so that they too 
may enjoy eternal life.” This may symbolize the inability on the part of a materialis¬ 
tic warrior race, such as the Assyrian, to ascend to a transcendent plane and thereby 
to be transformed into a stock of “heroes” fit to receive and to preserve the “gift of 
life” and to perpetuate the primordial tradition. Since the Assyrian-Chaldean calen¬ 
dar was lunar, however, as opposed to the Egyptian solar calendar, we also find in 
these civilizations traces of gynaecocracy of an Aphrodistic type. (See, for instance, 
the types like Semiramis, who was the real ruler of the kingdom of the Nile behind 
the effeminate Sardanapalus, almost as a reflection of the relationship between the 
divine couple composed by Ishtar and Ninip-Ador.) Even though it seems that in 
these races the woman originally played a dominant role and was only later over¬ 
come by man, this shift in power may be interpreted as the analogous sign of a wider 
movement that represented a further involution rather than a restoration. The re¬ 
placement of the Chaldeans by the Assyrians in many regards marks the passage 
from a Demetrian stage to a “Titanic” stage, which was expressed more signifi¬ 
cantly in the Assyrian bellicosity and fierceness that followed the Chaldean lunar 
and astrological priesthood. It is veiy significant that a legend established a relation¬ 
ship between Nimrod, who was credited with the foundation of Niniveh and of the 
Assyrian empire, and the Nephilim and other types of antedeluvian “giants,” who 
with their violence, “filled the earth with wickedness.” 

The Hebrew Cycle and the Eastern Aryan Cycle 

The failure of the attempt of the Chaldean hero Gilgamesh corresponds to the fall of 
Adam in the myth of another civilization within the Semitic cycle, the Hebrew civi¬ 
lization. Here we find a fundamental and characteristic motif: the transformation 
into sin of what in the Aryan version of the myth was regarded as a heroic, bold deed, 


TRBDITIOn ID flllTITRRDITIOn 

often crowned by success, but that in GilgamesITs myth had a negative outcome 
only because the hero was caught asleep. Jn the context of Hebrew Semitism, the 
one who attempts to take possession of the symbolic Tree is univocally transformed 
into a victim of woman’s seduction and a sinner. The curse he has to suffer and the 
punishment that has been meted out to him by a jealous, terrible, and omnipotent 
god, follow him; there is no better hope, in the end, than that for a “redeemer” who 
will provide a vicarious atonement. 

In the ancient Hebrew tradition there are also elements of a different type, Moses 
himself, though he owed his life to a woman of the royal family (i.e., pharaoh’s 
daughter, Exod. 2:5), was conceived of as having been “rescued from the waters”; 
likewise, the events described in the book of Exodus are capable of esoteric inter¬ 
pretation. Besides Elijah and Enoch, Jacob too was a heroic type, because he fought 
an angel and won; in relation to this, even the name “Israel,” which the angel gave 
him, conveys the idea of a “victory over the deity” (Gen. 32:29). These elements are 
still sporadic and reveal a curious oscillation, which is typical of the Jewish soul, 
between a sense of guilt, self-humiliation, deconsecration, and carnality and an al¬ 
most Luciferian pride and rebelliousness. Maybe this could be explained by the fact 
that even the initiatory tradition, which is also found in Judaism (e.g., the Kabbalah) 
and which played an important role in the European Middle Ages, has some particu¬ 
larly involuted traits, which characterize it at times as an “accursed science.” 

The Jews originally conceived the otherworld as the dark and mute Sheol, or as 
some kind of Hades without the counterpart of an “Island of Heroes”; not even sa¬ 
cred kings such as David could escape it. This is the theme of the “way of the ances¬ 
tors” ( pitj-yana in Hinduism), which in this context has special relevance as the idea 
of an ever greater distance between man and God. Even on this plane, however, we 
find a double characteristic. On the one hand, according to the ancient Hebrews, 
Jehovah is the true king; thus, the Jews saw in the full and traditional understanding 
of regal dignity a disparagement of God’s privilege (whether historical or not, Samuel’s 
opposition to the establishment of a monarchy is very significant). On the other hand, 
the Jewish people considered themselves to be a “chosen people” and “God’s people,” 
who had been promised dominion over all the other peoples and possession of all the 
riches of the earth. They even derived from the Iranian tradition the theme of the 
hero Saoshyant, who in Judaism became the “Messiah,” retaining for some time the 
traits typical of a manifestation of the “Lord of Hosts.” 

Not without relation to all this, in ancient Judaism we find a very visible effort 
on the part of a priestly elite to dominate and coalesce a turbid, multiple, and turbu¬ 
lent ethnical substance by establishing the divine Law as the foundation of its “form,” 
and by making it the surrogate of what in other people was the unity of the common 


240 


241 



Gtntju mid Fuce of the HIodem LUorld 


fatherland and the common origins. From this formative action, which was connected 
to sacred and ritualistic values and preserved from the first redactions of the ancient 
Torah to the elaboration of the Talmuds, the Jewish type arose as that of a spiritual 
rather than a physical race. 16 But the original substratum was never totally elimi¬ 
nated, as ancient Jewish history shows in the form of the recurrent betrayals of God 
and his becoming reconciled with Israel. This dualism and the ensuing tension help 
to explain the negative forms that Judaism assumed in later times. 

For Judaism, as in the case of other civilizations, the time frame between the 
seventh and the sixth century b.c. was characterized by upheaval. Once the military 
fortunes of Israel declined, defeat came to be understood as a punishment for “sins” 
committed, and thus an expectation developed that after a dutiful expiation Jehovah 
would once again assist his people and restore their power. This theme was dealt 
with in Jeremiah and in Isaiah. But since this did not happen, the prophetic expecta¬ 
tions degenerated into an apocalyptic, messianic myth and in the fantastic 
eschatological vision of a Savior who will redeem Israel; this marked the beginning 
of a process of disintegration. What derivedfrom the traditional component eventu¬ 
ally turned into a ritualistic formalism and thus became increasingly abstract and 
sepaiated fiom real life. Fo be aware of the role the Chaldean priestly sciences 
played in this cycle would allow one to connect to this source everything that was 
successively articulated in Judaism in the form of abstract thought and even of math¬ 
ematical insights (up to and including Spinoza’s philosophy and the modem “for¬ 
mal” physics in which the Jewish component is very strong). Moreover, a connection 
was established with a human type, who in order to uphold values that he cannot 
realize and that thus appear to him increasingly abstract and utopian, eventually 
leels dissatisfied and frustrated before any existing positive order and any form of 
authority (especially when we find in him, though in an unconscious way, the old 
idea accoiding to which the state of justice willed by God is only that in which Israel 
rules) so as to be a constant source of disorder and of revolution. Finally we must 
consider another dimension of the Jewish soul: it is like somebody who, having failed 
to realize the values typical of the sacral and transcendent dimension in the course of 
the attempt to overcome the antithesis between spirit and “flesh” (which he exasper¬ 
ates in a characteristic way), eventually rejoices wherever he discovers the illusion 
and the iireality of those values and wherever he ascertains the failure of the yearn¬ 
ing for redemption; this becomes for him some kind of alibi and self-justification. 
These aie specific developments of the original “guilt” motif, which acted in a 

16. Originally Israel was not a race, but a people, or an ethnical mixture of various elements. This was a 
typical case in which a tradition “created” a race, and especially a race of the soul. 


disaggregating way as Judaism became increasingly secularized and widespread 
during the most recent Western civilization. 

It is necessary to point out a characteristic moment in the development of the 
ancient Jewish spirit. The abovementioned period of crisis witnessed the loss of any¬ 
thing that was pure and virile in the ancient cult of Jehovah and in the warrior figure 
of the Messiah. Already in Jeremiah and in Isaiah there emerged a rebellious spiri¬ 
tuality that condemned and disdained the hieratic, ritual element; such was the mean¬ 
ing of Hebrew “prophetism,” which originally displayed traits that were very similar 
to the cults of inferior castes, and to the pandemic and ecstatic forms of the Southern 
races. The figure of the “seer” (roeh) was replaced by the figure of the one obsessed 
by the spirit of God. 17 Other features of prophetism were the pathos of the “servants 
of the Eternal,” which replaced the proud and fanatical self-confidence of being 
“God’s people,” and also an equivocal mysticism with apocalyptic overtones. The 
latter feature, once freed from the ancient Hebrew context, played a relevant role in 
the general crisis that affected the ancient Western world. The Diaspora, or the scat¬ 
tering of the Jewish people, corresponded to the by-products of the spiritual dissolu¬ 
tion of a cycle that did not have a “heroic” restoration and in which some sort of inner 
fracture promoted processes of an antitraditional character. There are ancient tradi¬ 
tions according to which Typhon, a demon opposed to the solar God, was the father 
of the Hebrews; various Gnostic authors considered the Hebrew gocl as one of 
Typhon’s creatures. These are references to a demonic spirit characterized by a 
constant restlessness, by an obscure contamination, and by a latent revolt of the 
inferior elements; when this substance returned to a free state and when it separated 
itself from the “Law,” that is, from the tradition that had formed it, all these factors 
acted upon the Jewish substratum in a more dramatic and decisive way than in other 
people. 

This is the origin of one of the main hotbeds of those forces that exercised an 
often unconscious, though negative influence during the last phases of the Western 
cycle of the Iron Age. 

Even though it began relatively recently, I will briefly refer to another tradition, 
Islam, which originated among Semitic races and succeeded in overcoming those 

17. Originally the prophets (nebiim) were possessed people who, through a natural disposition or through 
artificial means achieved a state of excitement in which they felt dominated and guided by a higher 
power, superior to their own wills. When they spoke it was no longer themselves but the spirit of God who 
made utterances. See J, Reville, Le Proph&isme hSbrcux (Paris, 1906). Thus the prophets were regarded 
by the priestly caste as raving lunatics; opposed to the prophet (nabi) originally there was the higher and 
“Olympian” figure of the seer (roeh): “In former times in Israel, anyone who sent to consult God used to 
say: ‘Come, let us go to the seer,’ for he who is now called prophet was formerly called seer.” i Sam. 9:9. 


242 


243 




Genesis rim Free of the HIoderei World 

negative motifs. As in the case of priestly Judaism, the center in Islam also consisted 
of the Law and Tradition, regarded as a formative force, to which the Arab stocks of 
the origins provided a purer and nobler human material that was shaped by a warrior 
spirit. The Islamic law (shariah) is a divine law; its foundation, the Koran, is thought 
of as God’s very own word (kalam Allah) as well as a non human work and an 
“uncreated book” that exists in heaven abetemo. Although Islam considers itself the 
“religion of Abraham,” even to the point of attributing to him the foundation of the 
Kaaba (in which we find again the theme of the “stone,” or the symbol of the “cen¬ 
ter”), it is nevertheless true that (a) it claimed independence from both Judaism and 
Christianity; (b) the Kaaba, with its symbolism of the center, is a pre-Islamic location 
and has even older origins that cannot be dated accurately; (c) in the esoteric Islamic 
tradition, the main reference point is al-Khadir, a popular figure conceived as supe¬ 
rior to and predating the biblical prophets (Koran 18:59-81). Islam rejects a theme 
found in Judaism and that in Christianity became the dogma and the basis of the 
mystery of the incarnation of the Logos; it retains, sensibly attenuated, the myth of 
Adam’s fall without building upon it the theme of “original sin,” In this doctrine 
Islam saw a “diabolical illusion” (talbis IbJis) or the in veiled theme of the fall of 
Satan (Iblis or Shaitan), which the Koran (18:48) attributed to his refusal, together 
with all his angels, to bow down before Adam. Islam also not only rejected the idea 
of a Redeemer or Savior, which is so central in Christianity, but also the mediation of 
a priestly caste. By conceiving of the Divine in terms of an absolute and pure mono¬ 
theism, without a “Son,” a “Father,” or a “Mother of God,” every person as a Muslim 
appears to respond directly to God and to be sanctified through the Law, which per¬ 
meates and organizes life in a radically unitary way in all of its juridical, religious, 
and social ramifications. In early Islam the only form of asceticism was action, that 
is, jihad, or “holy war”; this type of war, at least theoretically, should never be inter- 
i upted until the full consolidation of the divine Law has been achieved. It is precisely 
through the holy war, and not through preaching or missionary endeavor, that Islam 
came to enjoy a sudden, prodigious expansion, originating the empire of the Caliphs 
as well as forging a unity typical of a race of the spirit, namely, the umma or “Islamic 
nation. Finally, Islam piesents a traditional completeness, since the shariah and the 
sunna , that is, the exoteric law and tradition, have their complement not in a vague 
mysticism, but in full-fledged initiatory organizations (turuq) that are characterized 
by an esoteric teaching (tawil) and by the metaphysical doctrine of the Supreme 
Identity (tawhid). In these organizations, and in general in the shia, the recurrent 
notions of the masum, of the double prerogative of the isma (doctrinal infallibility ), 
and of the impossibility of being stained by any sin (which is the prerogative of the 
leaders, the visible and invisible Imams and, the mujtahici ), lead back to the line of 


:44 



an unbroken race shaped by a tradition at a higher level than both Judaism and the 
religious beliefs that conquered the West. 

If in India, which in ancient times was called aryavarnah , “land of the Aryans,” 
the term (vamati) designating the caste also meant “color”; and if the serfs’ caste of 
the §Qdras, which was opposite to the castes of the Aryans, the race of the “twice- 
born” (dvlja), was also called black race (krsjpa-varria), the inimical race (da S a- 
vawah), and the demonic race (asui'a) —in all this we can see the memory of the 
spiritual difference existing between two races that originally clashed, and also of 
the nature of the race that formed the higher castes. Apart from its metaphysical 

content, the myth of Indra—called hari-yaka, the “blond god,” or “golden hair”_is 

liable to have a historical meaning. The god Indra was bom despite his mother’s 
wish to the contrary; eventually abandoned by her, he did not perish but found a 
glorious path. The myth of this luminous and heroic god who exterminated the mul¬ 
titudes of black kr$na, who subdued the color dasa by causing the fall of the dasyu 
who wanted to ascend to “heaven,” who assisted the Aryans, and who conquered 
ever greater territories with the help of his “white companions” is likely to have a 
historical meaning. Finally, in the feats of Indra, who fights against the serpent Ahi 
and the dreadful warlock Namuci (possibly an echo of the legendary struggle of the 
devas against the asura ); in the figuration of the goddess of the dawn “who wanted 
to be great”; and in the destruction of the demon Vptra and of his mother by Indra, 
who thereby “generated the Sun and heaven,” namely, the Uranian, solar cult—we 
find mythical events that may contain allusions to the struggle between the cult of 
the Aryan conquerors against the demonic and magical (in the lower sense of the 
word) cults of aboriginal Dravidian, paleo-Malayan races. Moreover, since popular 
epics mention a primordial solar dynasty (surya-vamsa) that allegedly triumphed in 
India after it destroyed a lunar dynasty, this may well be an echo of the struggle 
against forms that are related to the Southern-Atlantic cycle. 18 The story of Parasu- 
Rama, the sixth avatar of Vi$nu, who is a hero wielding the Hyperborean axe, who 
exterminated (after several incarnations) the rebellious warrior class during an era 
(Treta Yuga) in which the ancestors of the Hindus still inhabited a northern region, 
and who prepared the way for the race of brahmana 19 from his northern seat; and 
even the tradition concerning Visnu, also called the “golden god,” who destroyed the 

18. Some recent archaeological excavations have brought to light the vestiges of a pre-Aryan Hindu civiliza¬ 
tion similar to the Sumerian, which supplied the main elements to the civilizations of the southeastern 
Mediterranean cycle. In relation to the Aryan element, in India the attribute used for salvific deities and 
heroes is huri and hnrit, a term which means both “the golden one” (in relation to the primordial cycle: 
Apollo, Horus, etc.) and the “blond god.” 

19. MahRbhSratu; Visnu Purana, 4.8. 


245 


Genesis bod Face of the Modem World 


Tradition and (Iatitmdition 


mlecchas, the degenerated warrior stocks who had become alienated from the sa¬ 
cred 20 —-are among the various themes that allude to the overcoming of degenerated 
forms and to the reaffirmation or restoration of a “heroic” type. 

In historical India, however, we find traces of a modification that was probably 
due to the substratum of the autochthonous vanquished races. Thus, by virtue of a 
subtle action that undermined the original spirituality of the Aryan conquerors, and 
despite the subsistence of virile asceticism and heroic fulfillment, India eventually 
took the course of “contemplation” and of “priestly ways” instead of remaining rig¬ 
orously faithful to the original regal and solar path. The period of greater tension 
extended to the time of Visvamitra, who incarnated the regal and priestly dignity 
and who exercised his authority overall the Aryan stocks living in tine Punjab region. 
The following period, in which the Gangetic plains were invaded already marked a 
time of division. 

The authority the priestly caste acquired in India may therefore be considered, 
as in the case of Egypt, a subsequent development, and it probably derived from the 
importance that the piirohita (the brahma na working under the sacral king) slowly 
acquired as soon as the original dynasties decayed following the Aryans 1 settlement 
in the recently conquered territories; these dynasties eventually ranked as a mere 
warrior nobility vis-a-vis the priestly caste. Popular epics recall a prolonged and 
v iolent struggle between the priestly and warrior castes for the control of India. 21 The 
division, which took place in a later period, did not prevent the priests from having 
virile and regal traits or the warrior caste (originally called the regal caste, rajanya) 
from retaining its own spirituality, which in various instances triumphed over the 
priestly spirituality; in the warrior spirituality we often find specific traces of the 
original boreal element. 

Moreover, the “Nordic” elements within the Indo-Aryan civilization were: (1) 
the austere type of the ancient atharvan, the “lord of fire,” he who “first opened the 
paths through sacrifices,” as well as the type of the brahmana, he who dominates the 
brahman and the gods through his formulas of power; (2) the doctrine of the absolute 
Self (atman) of the early Upanisadic period, which corresponds to the impassible 
and luminous principle of Samkhya; (3) the virile and conscious asceticism oriented 
to the Unconditioned that also characterized the Buddhist doctrine of awakening; (4) 
the doctrine of pure action and heroism expounded in the Bhagavadglta , which was 

20. Ibid., 4.3. 

21. See for instance the MahSbhiinna ancl ihe RiSmSyapa .There is an interesting tradition concerning a Umar 
dynasty, which through sown, was associated with the priestly caste ancl the telluric, vegetal kingdom. 
This dynasty usurped the solar ritual (rSjasttyn), became violent, and attempted to kidnap the divine 
woman Tara; this caused the outbreak of a war between gods and us urn. Vjsnu-Purana 4.6. 


credited with a solar origin and a regal heritage; (5) the Vedic view of the world as 
“order” (na) and law (dharma); and (6) the patriarchical right, the cult of fire, the 
symbolically rich ritual of the cremation of the dead, the caste system, the cult of 
truth and honor, the myth of the universal sacred sovereign (cakravartin). In all these 
elements we find the traditional poles of “action” and “contemplation” closely inter¬ 
twined and elevated to a higher meaning. 

In India, in much older times, the southern component was found in everything 
that betrayed, unlike the purer and more spiritual elements of the Vedic cult, a kind 
of primacy of the imagination and a chaotic and tropical effusion of animal and 
vegetal symbols that eventually came to dominate the greater part of the external 
artistic and religious expressions of the Hindu civilization. Even though the Tantric 
cult in its Shaivite trajectories was purified and transformed into a superior type of 
magic 22 and into a doctrine of power, nevertheless, because of its deification of woman 
and its orgiastic elements, it represented the resurgence of a pre-Aryan and ancient 
root congenially akin to the Mediterranean-Asiatic civilizations dominated by the 
figure and the cult of the Mother. 23 It is possible that this root encompassed all those 
features that in Hindu asceticism have a mortifying character; allegedly the same 
ideal orientation connected it with what emerged among the Maya and the civiliza¬ 
tions of Sumerian stock. 24 

On the other hand, the disintegration of the Aryan worldview began in Ind: 
when the identity between the atman and brahman was interpreted in a pantheist 
sense that reflected the spirit of the South. Brahman was no longer conceived, as ii 
the earlier period described in the Atharva Veda and in the Brahmanas, as the spirit 
or the formless magical force characterized by an almost “mana-like” quality that 
the Aryan dominates and directs through his rite: brahman was instead conceived as 
the One and All from which all life forms proceed and into which they are redis¬ 
solved. When it is interpreted in such a pantheistic fashion, the doctrine of the iden¬ 
tity between atman and brahman leads to the denial of the spiritual personality and 
is transformed into a ferment of degeneration and promiscuity: one of its corollaries 
will be the equality of all creatures. The doctrine of reincarnation, understood as the 
primacy of the destiny of a recurrent and yet ephemeral reappearance in the condi¬ 
tioned world (saiiisara) —a doctrine not found in the early Vedic period became 
predominant. Thus, asceticism aimed at achieving a liberation that had the meaning 
of escapism rather than a truly transcendent fulfillment. 

Early Buddhism, which was originated by Prince Siddharta Gautama, an ascetic 

22. J. Evola, The Yoga of Power. 

23. J. Woodroffe, Shakti and Shakta (Madras, 1929). 

24. M. Eliade, Patanjaii and Yoga (New York, 1975). 


246 


247 



Gehesis hod Face of the Modem World 


from a warrior clan, may be considered in many ways as a reaction against these 
views as well as against the purely speculative interest and the ritualistic formalism 
that had become predominant in so many brahmana circles. The Buddhist doctrine 
of awakening, by declaring that the view of the identification of the self with nature, 
with the All, and even with the divinity theistically conceived (Brahma) is proper to 
“an uninstructed average person, taking no account of the pure ones, unskilled in the 
dhaiTna of the pure ones, untrained in the dharma of the pure ones,” 25 firmly upheld 
the principle of an aristocratic asceticism oriented to an authentically transcendent 
goal. Thus, Buddhism represented a reformation that occurred at a time of crisis in 
traditional Indo-Aryan spirituality and was contemporary with the crisis that was 
manifested in other civilizations, both Eastern and Western. With regard to this we 
find in Buddhism a characteristic opposition, inspired by a pragmatic and realistic 
spirit, to the mere doctrine or dialectics that became “philosophical thought” in Greece. 
Buddhism was opposed to the traditional doctrine of atman only inasmuch as the 
latter no longer corresponded to a living reality and had become an emasculated 
complex of theories and speculations of the priestly caste. By denying that every 
human being is endowed with an atman; by denying the doctrine of reincarnation 
(Buddhism denies the existence of a personal nucleus that remains identical through 
various incarnations: according to Buddhism, what reincarnates is not a “self,” but 
“craving,” tanha)\ and by reaffirming the atman as nirvana , as a state that can be 
achieved very rarely through asceticism—Buddhism promoted a “heroic” theme (the 
attainment of immortality) over and against the echoes of a primordial, divine self- 
knowledge that had been preserved in various doctrines of the priestly caste; these 
doctrines, moreover, no longer corresponded to an experience for the majority of 
people, due to a process of decline already at work in those times. 26 

A characteristic phenomenon of this situation in more recent times, as the ex¬ 
pression of two opposite views, is the opposition between the bhakti doctrine of 
Ramanuja and the Vedanta doctrine of Sankara. The latter appears to be marked by 
the spirit of a strict and straightforward intellectual asceticism; nevertheless, it was 
essentially oriented to the Demetrian lunar theme of the formless brahman (nirguna- 
Brahma), in regard to which all determined forms are nothing but an illusion and a 
negation, or a sheer product of ignorance (avidya). Thus we can say that Sankara 
exemplifies the highest possibility of a civilization of the Silver Age. On the other 
hand, Ramanuja may be considered as the representative of the following age, which 
was determined by the merely human element, and of the new theme that appeared 

25. Majjhima NikSya (The Middle-Length Sayings), 1.1. 

26. For a systematic exposition based on the texts and on the historical milieu of the early Buddhist doctrine 
of awakening, see my Doctrine of Awakening. 


at the time of the decadence of Egypt and among Semitic cycles as well: the theme 
of the metaphysical distance between the human and the divine, which further re¬ 
moves from man the “heroic” possibility and leaves him mainly with a sentimental 
and devotional attitude toward the deity. Thus, while Vedanta acknowledged God 
as a person only at the level of an “inferior knowledge,” and while the highest state 
of supreme unity (ekatabhava) ranked higher than devotion, which was conceived 
as a relationship between father and son (pitr putra bhava)— Ramanuja attacked 
these views as blasphemous and heretic with a pathos similar to that of the early 
Church apologists. 27 In Ramanuja we find the awareness, which humanity had even¬ 
tually arrived at, of the irreality of the ancient doctrine of atman and the perception 
of the distance existing between the empirical self and the transcendent Self, or 
atman. The superior and yet exceptional possibility upheld by Buddhism, which was 
admitted to a. certain degree even in Vedanta inasmuch as it upheld the principle of 
metaphysical identification, was excluded in Ramanuja’s theistic worldview. 

Thus, in the Hindu civilization of historical times we find a play of forms and 
meanings that can be reduced respectively to the Aryan, boreal spirituality (to which 
I referred whenever I drew examples from India of “traditional spirit” with regard to 
doctrine), and to various distortions of this spirituality, which betray influences of the 
substratum of the defeated aboriginal races, their chthonic cults, their unleashed 
imagination, their promiscuity, and the orgiastic and chaotic manifestations of their 
evocations and ecstasies. Although in more recent times India appears to be a tradi¬ 
tional civilization, since in it life is totally and radically oriented toward a sacral and 
ritual direction, it nevertheless embodies one of the two secondary possibilities that 
were originally subsumed in a higher synthesis: the possibility represented by a tra¬ 
ditional contemplative world. Tire pole of asceticism as “knowledge” and not as 
“action” characterizes the traditional spirit of India, despite the presence, rather than 
the dominance, of many other forms in which the orientation proper to the inner race 
of the warrior caste arose again in a “heroic” form. 

Iran appears to have remained more faithful to such an orientation, even though 
it did not reach the same metaphysical heights that India achieved by following the 
contemplative paths. The warrior character of the cult of Ahura Mazda speaks for 
itself, as do (a) the ancient Iranian cult of fire, part of which is the well-known doc¬ 
trine of the hvareno or “glory”; (b) the rigorous patriarchical system; (c) the Aryan 
ethic of truth and faithfulness; (d) the view of the world as rtam and asa, as cosmos, 
rite, and order, a view connected to that dominating Uranian principle that eventu¬ 
ally led to the metaphysical ideal of the empire and the corresponding view of the 

27. The same type of involution occurred in many versions of Buddhism, notably in Amidism, which eventu¬ 
ally became a “religion." 


248 


249 



Genesis mid Face of the FTIoDERn ULIorld 

sovereign as “king of kings,” once the original plurality of the first conquering stocks 
was overcome. 

Originally, next to the three castes corresponding to three superior castes of the 
Hindu Aryans (brahmana, ksatriya, and vaisya), in ancient Iran there was no distinct 
caste of sudras; it was almost as if in those regions the Aryan stocks had never met at 
all, or had never encountered as an important social stratum, the aboriginal element 
of the South that was responsible for the alteration of the ancient Hindu spirit. Iran 
shares with India the cult of truth, faithfulness, and honor; the type of the Mede- 
Iranian atharvan —the lord of the sacred fire, synonymous with the “man of the pri¬ 
mordial law” (paorjyo Lhaesha )—was the Hindu equivalent of the atharvan and the 
brahmana in its original form, which was not yet a priestly one. Even within this 
aristocratic spirituality, however, there must have been a decline that culminated in 
a crisis and in the appearance, in the person of Zarathustra, of the figure of a re¬ 
former similar to that of Buddha. Even in Zarathustra \s life we may detect a reaction 
aimed at reintegrating the principles of the original cult—which were getting lost 
even in a naturalistic sense—in a purer and immaterial form, though they were not 
yet free, in several aspects, of a sort of “moralism ” There is a particularly meaning¬ 
ful legend found in the Yashna and in the Bundahesh according to which Zarathustra 
was “bom” in the Airyana Vaego, the primordial boreal land, conceived in the leg¬ 
end as the “seed of the race of the Aryans,” and also as the seat of the Golden Age 
and of the regal “glory”; it was there that Zarathustra first revealed his doctrine. The 
precise era in which Zarathustra lived has been debated. The ('act is that “Zarathustra/ 1 
like “Hermes” (the Egyptian Henries) and other similar figures—designated more a 
given spiritual influence than a single individual and therefore may be a name refer¬ 
ring to several people who in different ages incarnated such an influence. The his¬ 
torical Zarathustra should be considered a specific manifestation of this figure and of 
the primordial Hyperborean Zarathustra (hence the theme of his birth in the primor¬ 
dial seat of mankind), whose mission was to exercise a rectifying action paralleling 
that of Buddha in an era that approximately corresponds to that of the abovementioned 
crisis in other traditions. Interestingly enough, Zarathustra fought against the god of 
darkness who had assumed the semblance of a female demon, and during his struggl e 
he offered prayers to the good waters of the Daitya River located in the Airyana 
Vaego. 28 At a historical level we find mention of the bitter struggles Zarathustra 
waged against the caste of the Magi, who in some later texts came to be considered 
as emissaries of the daeva, namely, of the beings who are sworn enemies of the god 
of light, Ahura Mazda; this testifies to the involution and decadence the priestly 
caste had fallen into. Within the Persian tradition, the “dominating” characteristic of 

28. Vendidad, 19.2. 


iRflDITIOn flllD flflTITRRDITIOn 

which was essentially Aryan and regal, a tension arose at one point that was caused 
by the hegemonic claims of the priestly caste, judging from the attempt of the priest 
Gaumata, who attempted to usurp the supreme power and establish a theocracy but 
was expelled by Darius I. This, though, was the first and only attempt of this kind in 
Persian history. 

The original theme, almost as if reinvigorated from contact with altered tradi¬ 
tional iorms of other people, arose again in Mithraism in the form of a new “heroic” 
cycle endowed with a specific initiatory foundation. Mithras, the solar hero who 
overcame the telluric bull, and the ancient god of the luminous ether who was similar 
to Indra and to the Hindu Mitra, was a figure that stood alone, without those women 
and goddesses who usually accompany the Syrian gods and the decadent Egyptian 
gods in an Aphrodistic or Dionysian fashion; thus, he embodied in a characteristic 
way the Northern-Uranian spirit in its warrior form. Moreover, it is significant that 
Mithras was identified with Prometheus rather than with the Hyperborean Apollo, 
the god of the Golden Age; this refers to the luminous transfiguration through which 
the Titan was confused with a deity personifying the primordial spirituality. Mithras 
was born from a stone wielding the symbols of the sword and the light (a torch). In a 
theme also found in the myth of the Titans, we encounter figurations of Mithras using 
the leaves of a “tree” to cover himself before wrestling victoriously with the sun, 
becoming his ally, and eventually becoming identified with him. 

An antitelluric spirit characterized Mithraism; unlike the views of the followers 
of Serapis and Isis, Mithraism located the abode of the “liberated ones” in the spheres 
of the pure Uranian light rather than in the depths of the earth; the blessed would 
arrive in this “heaven” after the journey through the various planets divested them of 
all earthly attachments and passions. 29 We should also take notice of the almost 
universal exclusion of women from the Mithraic cult and initiation; the ethos of the 
Mithraic community, in which the hierarchical principle was upheld together with 
the principle of brotherhood, was radically opposed to both the promiscuous feelings 
proper to the southern communities and to the obscure emphasis on blood that is 
recurrent, for instance, in Judaism. Rather than being based on the mysticism of love, 
the brotherhood of the Mithraic initiates, who took on the title of soldiers (milites), 
reflected more that clear and strongly individuated brotherhood existing between 
wamors committed to the same enterprise. The same ethos later surfaced both in 
ancient Rome and in the Germanic stocks. 

In reality, although Mithraism began to decline once Mithras was conceived of 

29. The reason why the ancient Iranians did not practice cremation, unlike several other Nordic-Aryan stocks, 
was that they believed that the corpse corrupted the sacredness of fire. See W. Ridgeway, Early Age of 
Greece (Cambridge:, 1901). 


250 


251 


Geiiem (hid Face of the IHodem LUorld 


as a “savior"’ (aovfjp) and a “mediator” (peering) on an almost religious plane, 
nevertheless, in its central nucleus, it appeared historically (at a time of a deep crisis 
in the ancient world) as the symbol of a different direction that the Romanized West 
could have taken instead of the direction represented by Christianity, which eventu¬ 
ally prevailed and around which various antitraditional and disaggregating influ¬ 
ences crystallized. The last spiritual reaction of the ancient Roman world, repre¬ 
sented by the emperor Julian, himself an initiate to the Mithraic Mysteries, drew 
inspiration from Mithraism. 

We shall recall in passing that even after the Islamic conquest of the ancient 
Iranian regions some themes connected to the previous tradition eventually enjoyed 
a revival. Thus, from the reign of the Safavids (1501-1722) onward the official reli¬ 
gion of Persia has been imamism, which is based on the idea of an invisible leader 
(imam), who after a period of “absence” will one day reappear “to defeat injustice 
and to reestablish a Golden Age on earth.” The Persian monarchs claimed to be the 
spokesmen of the Hidden Imam until the day of his return. It is the ancient Aryan- 
Iranian theme of Saoshyant. 30 


30. Vendidad, 19.5; Yasht, 19.89: "The fiend-smiter will come up to life out of the lake Kasava. from the 
region of the dawn, to free the world from death and decay, corruption and rottenness ... the dead shall 
rise and immortality commence." 


252 


30 



The Heroic-Uranian Western Cycle 


The Hellenic Cycle 

W hen considering the Western world and in particular ancient Hellas, two as¬ 
pects must be considered. The first is connected to meanings analogous to 
those I previously detected in the formation process of other great civilizations; 
these meanings point to a world that had not yet grown secularized and that was still 
permeated by the general principle of the “sacred.” The second aspect refers to pro¬ 
cesses that anticipate the last humanistic, lay, and rationalistic cycle; it is precisely 
because of this aspect that many modems gladly regard Greece as the origin of their 
civilization. 

Hellenic civilization also has a much older Aegean and Pelasgic substratum in 
which we find the recurrence of the general theme of the Atlantic civilization of the 
Silver Age, especially in the form of Demetrism, together with frequent accretions 
of motifs of a lower order inspired by chthonic and demonic cults. Over and against 
this substratum we find the typically Hellenic forms of that civilization created by 
the conquering Achaeans and Doric stocks and characterized by the Olympian ideal 
of the Homeric cycle and the cult of the Hyperborean Apollo. The victorious struggle 
of Apollo against the serpent Python, which was portrayed underneath Apollo’s temple 
at Delphi (prior to this cult at Delphi was the oracle of the Mother, Gaea, who was 
associated with the demon of the waters, namely, the Atlantic-Pelasgic Poseidon), is 
one of those myths carrying a double meaning: it describes both a metaphysical 
event and a struggle between a race practicing a Uranian cult and a race practicing 
a chthonic cult. We must also consider the effects of the reemergence of the original 
stratum, which caused the triumph of several varieties of Dionysism, Aphroditism, 
Pythagoreanism, as well as of other spiritualities connected to the chthonic cult and 
rite, including their corresponding social and moral forms. 

This is also true on the ethical plane. From this perspective we can distinguish 
three strata. The first stratum is linked to remnants of races that were completely 


253 





Germs rod Free of the Modem World 


Tre Ueroic-Urrriar Westerr (dele 


foreign to the races of the northwestern or Atlantic cycle and thus to the Indo- 
European races. The second stratum probably derives from the branching off of the 
Westem-Atlantic race, which in ancient times reached as far as the Mediterranean 
basin. This stratum may be called “paleo-Irtdo-European,” though we should not for¬ 
get the alteration and the involution that it underwent; the Pelasgic civilization is es¬ 
sentially connected with this stratum. The third stratum corresponds to the Hellenic 
populations of a northwestern origin that migrated to Greece in relatively recent times. 
This triple stratification and the dynamic of the corresponding influences were also 
present in the Italic civilization. As far as Hellas is concerned, it is possible that this 
stratification was reflected in the three classes of the Sparhates, Perieces, and Helots 
in ancient Sparta. The tripartition, instead of the traditional quadripartition, must be 
explained by the presence of an aristocracy that had simultaneously a warrior and a 
sacred character; this was the case with the stock of the Heracteids or of the Geleonts, 
“the Radiant Ones,” who claimed Zeus or Gelcon as their symbolic forefather. 

Prescinding from the hostile way in which the Greek historians described the 
Pelasgians and from the connection they often established between the Pelasgian and 
ihe Syrio-Egyptian cults and customs, the heterogeneity of the Achaean world, in com¬ 
parison with the previous Pelasgic civilization,’ has nevertheless been acknowledged, 
even by modern researchers, who have also established the racial affinity and the 
similarities in customs and in the type of civilization of the Aehaeans and the Dorians 
on the one hand, and of the Northcm-Aryan stocks of the Celts, the Germanic tribes, 
the Scandinavian populations, and even the Aryans in India on the other. : The follow¬ 
ing factors clearly illustrate what kind of forces clashed in ancient and prehistoric 
Greece: (a) the plain linear purity, the geometric and “solar” clarity, the essentiahsm 
and simplicity that signify liberation, power, and primordiality that was radically form 
and cosmos in the Doric style over and against the chaotic organicism and the employ¬ 
ment of animal and vegetal symbols prevalent in the traces of the Cretan-Mmoan 
civilization; (b) the luminous Olympian figurations versus the traditions concerned with 
god-snakes and man-serpents, demons with donkey heads and black goddesses with 
horse heads, and the magical cult of the subterranean fire or of the deities of the waters. 
One of the stories of prehistoric Greece was of the demise of the legendary kingdom 
of Minos, who was enthroned in the Pelasgic land in which Zeus was considered a 
chtbonic demon and thus a mortal beingfin which the black Mother earth was the 

1, Herodotus [Histories 1.56; 8/14) regarded the early Ionian inhabitants of Athens as Pelasgians and called 
their language ‘'barbarous,” that is, non-Hellenic. 

2. VV. Ridgeway, 77ie Early Age of Greece (Cambridge, IWt), 1,337-106; 4(77, 541. This work contains, 

several valuable insights regarding the separation of the Nordic component from the Pelasgic component 
within Hellenic civilization, even though the author emphasizes the ethnic more than the spiritual oppusn 

tion between these components. 

.V Callimachus, Hymn to Zeus, 5,9. 


greatest and the mightiest of all the deities; in which we find the predominant cult (still 
connected with the feminine element and probably related to the Egyptian deca¬ 
dence 1 2 * 4 ) o! Hera, Iiestia, Themis, and of the Nereids; and in which the supreme limit 
consisted in the Demetrian, lunar mystery characterized by gynaecocratic transposi¬ 
tions in the rites and in the social customs. 5 

On a different plane, a trace of the victoiy of the new civilization over the old 
one is found in Aeschylus’s Eumenides . In the assembly of the gods that is called to 
pass judgment over Orestes, who killed his mother Clytemnestra in order to avenge 
his lather, the conflict between truth and virile privileges on the one hand and truth 
and womanly privileges on the other, is clearly exemplified. Apollo and Athena side 
against the nocturnal female deities (the Erinyes) who want to take revenge on Orestes. 

II in the Eumenides it. is declared that it is possible to be a father without a mother (a 
reference to the symbolical birth of Athena and in opposition to the maternity of the 
primordial virgins who did not require mates), the purpose was to emphasize the 
superior ideal of virility and the idea of a spiritual and pure “genesis” free from that 
naturalistic plane in which the Mother’s right and status rule supreme. Thus, the 
absolution of Orestes marked the triumph of a new law, a new custom, a new cult, 
and a new right—such was the complaint of the Eumenides, who were chthonic 
female deities with snake’s heads, the daughters of the Night, and the symbols of the 
ancient pre-Hellenic era. It is significant that where the divine judgment took place 
in Aeschylus’ tragedy was the hill sacred to the warrior god Ares, located in the 
ancient citadel of the Amazons who were massacred by Theseus. 

The Olympian conception of the divine was one of the most characteristic ex¬ 
pressions of the Northern Light among the Hellenes; it was the view of a symbolical 
world of immortal and luminous essences detached from the inferior region of earthly 
beings and of things subjected to becoming, even though sometimes a “genesis” was 
ascribed to some gods; it was a view of the sacred associated by analogy with bright 
skies and with snowy peaks, as in the symbols of the Eddie Asgard and of the Vedic 

4. llcrodouis, Histories, 2.50. There are two traditions concerning the Pelasgian Minos: in the first he ap¬ 
pears as a just king and as a divine legislator (his name has an interesting etymological similarity to the 
Hindu Maim, the Egyptian Manes, the Germanic Mannus, and maybe the Latin Numa); in the second he 
appears as a violent and demonic power ruling over the waters. The opposition between the Hellenes and 
Minos refers to the latter tradition. 

5. Thus wrote Bacliofen: “Gynaccocracy is part of the legacy of those races that Strabo (7.321; 7.572) re¬ 
garded as barbarous and as the early pre-Hellenic inhabitants of Greece and of Asia Minor, whose re¬ 
peated migrations began ancient history just as the migratory waves of northern populations during later 
times began the history of our limes,” Mutterrecht, 43. Another historian, Domenico Mosso (Origini della 
civilta ' nieditemuien, 128) showed that the piiestesses of the sarcophagus of Hagia Triada were in charge 
of the most important functions of the priesthood, while men only had a secondary role in it. Mosso also 
indicated that Lhe Minoan-Pelasgian religion retained its matriarchical character for a long time and that 
the privileged status of women, not only in the rites but also in social life (Escursioni nei Mediterraneo, 
216, 221), characterized both the Minoan and the Etruscan civilizations. 


254 


255 


Geoesis (iod Face of the Modem World 


The Herok-Umi™ Westerd Cejcle 


Mount Meru. The ideas concerning: (a) Chaos as the primordial principle and its 
early manifestations, namely, the Night and Erebus, as the principle of a further 
generation, including the generating of Light and of Day; (b) the Earth as the univer¬ 
sal Mother who precedes her heavenly groom; and finally, (c) the entire contingency 
of a chaotic becoming, succumbing, and being transformed that was attributed even 
to divine natures—all these ideas, are really not Hellenic, but rather themes that 
betray the Pelasgic substratum in Hesiod’s syncretism. 

Ancient Hellas knew both the Olympian theme and the “heroic” theme. Like¬ 
wise, the “heroes” were perceived to be above mortal and human nature and were 
regarded as demigods who participated in the same Olympian immortality; the Dorian 
and the Achaean hero in many cases was defined and forged by action rather than by 
blood ties with the stock of the gods (that is, by an inherited supernatural status). His 
being was entirely epic, just as in the case of the types that are found in more recent 
cycles. His being did not know the mystical abandonments of the Southern Light, 
nor the return to the generating cosmic womb. Victory (Nike) crowns the Doric 
Heracles in the Olympian dwelling characterized by a pure virility that is “immune” 
from the Titanic element. The ideal type was not Prometheus—since the Hellenes 
regarded him as a vanquished foe of Zeus, the latter being the conqueror of Pelasgic 
deities 6 —but rather the antigynaecocratic hero Heracles, who triumphed over the 
Titanic element; freed Prometheus after siding with the Olympian gods; destroyed 
the Amazons; wounded the Great Mother herself; took the Hesperides* apples after 
defeating the dragon; rescued Atlas after assuming the function of “pole,” not as a 
penance but as a test; and after walking through “fire,” passed from an earthly exist¬ 
ence to an Olympian immortality. Deities who suffer and die in order to come back 
to life as vegetal natures produced by the earth as well as deities who personify the 
passion of the yearning and broken soul were totally foreign to this primordial Hel¬ 
lenic spirituality. 

In contrast to the chthonic ritual associated with aboriginal and Pelasgic strata, 
which was characterized by the fear of demonic forces (SetoiSaijJovia), and by an 
all-pervasive sense of “contamination,” of evil that must be warded off, and of trag¬ 
edies that must averted (anOKOjiKod), the Olympian Achaean ritual knew only clear 
and precise relationships with the gods, who were positively conceived as principles 
of beneficial influences and who were dealt with without any fear and with the fa¬ 

6. The Olympian Zeus, after defeating the Titans and their allies, confined them to Tartarus or Erebus, which 
is the location where '“Atlas” was kept prisoner and also the seat of Hecate, one of the forms of the 
Pelasgian Goddess. 

7. See J. E. Harrison, Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion (Cambridge, 1903), 4-10; 120; 162. In this 

work there are several valid observations regarding the opposition between an Achaean Olympian ritual 
and a chthonic ritual within the Greek religion. 


miliarity and dignity characteristic of an attitude of cfo ut des in a higher sense. 7 The 
fate (i.e., Hades) that awaited most people living in the “dark age” did not frighten 
this virile mankind, but was confronted in a calm and impassive manner. The higher 
hope of the “few” rested in the purity of fire, to which the corpses of heroes and of 
great leaders were ritually offered (in view of their definitive liberation) in the ritual 
of cremation, as opposed to the burial practices that symbolized the return to the 
womb of Mother Earth found among pre-Hellenic and Pelasgic stocks. 8 The world of 
the ancient Achaean soul did not know the pathos of expiation and of “salvation”; it 
also ignored ecstasies and mystical raptures. Here too, it is necessary to differentiate 
the parts in what seems to be one bloc; it is necessary to restore to their respective 
antithetical origins what refers to each of them within the whole of the Hellenic 
civilization. 

Post-Homeric Greece shows many signs of the reemergence and rebellion of 
the original subjugated strata against the properly Hellenic element. Chthonic themes 
typical of an older civilization reappeared, because of contacts with neighboring 
civilizations, which contributed to their revival. The peak of the crisis occurred 
between the seventh and the sixth century b.c. During this time, Dionysian spiritu¬ 
ality became prevalent—a very significant phenomenon, considering that the 
feminine element prepared its way. I have already discussed the universal mean¬ 
ing of this phenomenon; therefore, in this context I will only point out that this 
meaning was preserved even in the passage from the wild Thracian forms to the 
Hellenized Orphic Dionysus, who was still regarded as an underground god and as 
a being associated with the chthonic Gaea and Zeus. Moreover, while in the fren¬ 
zies and in the ecstasies of Thracian Dionysism the real experience of transcen¬ 
dence could occur in a flash, in Orphism we witness the slow but gradual predomi¬ 
nance of a pathos similar to that shared by the “all-too-human” religions based on 
redemption. 

Just as a Jew feels cursed because of Adam’s fall, which he conceives as “sin,” 
likewise the Oiphic follower felt the need to expiate the crime of the Titans who 
devoured the god. Very rarely did the latter conceive of the authentic “heroic” pos¬ 
sibility, preferring instead to await the gifts of health and liberation from the body 

8. See Ridgeway, Early Age of Greece (506 f'f.; 521-25), which shows the opposition between the cremation 
practices of northern Aryan origin and the burial practices of Greek-Pelasgic origin; this difference re¬ 
flects the Uranian and the telluric views of the afterlife. The cremation of corpses was practiced by those 
who wanted to remove once and for all the psychic residues of the “deceased,” since these residues were 
regarded as baleful influences, or by those who imagined for the soul of the “hero” a dwelling totally 
removed from the earth; this dwelling could be reached only after the last connection with the living (i.e., 
the corpse) was destroyed as if through an extreme purification. The burial ritual expresses the return of 
“earth to earth" and the dependency on the origins conceived in a telluric fashion. In Homer’s times this 
ritual was virtually unknown, just like the idea of a “hell” and its torments. 


256 


257 


GtllCilS OOD fPC£ Of THE MODEM UJORLD 


The HEROic-URflnmn Westeru Lcle 


from some kind of “savior” (who also was subjected to the same destiny of death and 
resurrection affecting plant gods and year god). 9 

The infective disease”—consisting of the guilt complex in conjunction with the 
terror of punishments in the netherworld and with an undignified yearning for an 

escapist liberation that is rooted in the inferior and passional part of one’s being_ 

never plagued the Greeks during the better period of their history; such a “disease” 
was characteristically anti-Hellenic and it was caused by extraneous influences. 10 * 
Tire same applied to the increased emphasis on aesthetics and sensuality found in 
later Greek civilization and society as exemplified by the prevalence of the Ionian 
and Corinthian forms over the Doric ones. 

Tire crisis of the ancient aristocratic and sacral regime of the Greek cities oc¬ 
curred almost at the same time as the Dionysian “epidemics.” A revolutionary fer¬ 
ment alteied the nature of the ancient institutions, the ancient view of the state, the 
law, and even property. By dissociating temporal authority from spiritual authority, 
piomoting the electoral system, and establishing institutions that became increas¬ 
ingly open to inferior social strata—to an “impure” aristocracy (e.g., the caste of the 
met chants in Athens and in Cuma), and finally even to the plebs protected by popu- 
lai tyrants (in Argon, Corinth, Sicion, etc.)—this revolutionary ferment eventually 
engendered the democratic regime. Regality, oligarchy, bourgeoisie, and finally il¬ 
legitimate rulets who derived their power from merely personal prestige and who 
leaned on the demos—these were the descending phases of the involution that took 
place in Greece, that occurred again in ancient Rome, and that are found on a grand 
scale in modern civilization. 

Gieek democracy, rather than a conquest of Greek civilization should be re¬ 
garded as a victory of Asia Minor and of the Southern Hemisphere over the primor¬ 
dial Hellenic stocks that were too weak and scattered to react." Tire political phe¬ 
nomenon is strictly connected with similar apparitions that affect the spiritual plane 

9. Herodotus (Histories, 2.81) did not distinguish Orpheus from Bacchus; if Dio (Roman History)re tales the 
modifications Orpheus allegedly introduced into the orgiastic rituals, this may be a modification in a 
Pythagorean sense (Orpheus as musician, or the idea of harmony), which, however, did not alter its 
fundamental characlcr. According to some Orpheus came from Crete, that is from an Atlantic-Pelasgic 
center; others, by identifying him with Pythagoras himself, see him as a descendant of the Atlanteans 

10. Harrison (Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion, 120; 162) identified those festivals in which the 
feminine theme was predominant with the forms of magical rituals of purification that were typical of the 
ancient chthomc cult; n is likely that they constituted the germ of a certain aspect of the Mysteries. The 
notion of purification and expiation, which was virtually unknown in the Olympian cult, was a dominant 
theme in the inferior stratum. Later on, some kind of compromise and sublimation took place. Once the 
aristocratic idea of divinity as a natural state was lost (the heroes were mainly such by virtue of their 

divine origins), what ensued was the idea of a mortal man who yearned for immortality; then the ancient 
magical and exorcising motif of purification and of expiation was assumed in the mystical form of‘'puri¬ 
fication from death,” and finally in the form of a moral purification and expiation, as in the decadent 

aspects of the Mysteries that presaged Christianity. 


in a more direct way, such as the democratization undergone by both the view of 
immortality and the notion of “hero/’ Demeter’s mysteries at Eleusis may be re¬ 
garded as a sublimation of the ancient pre-Hellenic and Pelasgic Mysteries by 
virtue of their original purity and aristocratic exclusivism; this ancient substratum 
arose and became predominant again once the Eleusinian Mysteries allowed any¬ 
body to partake of the ritual that “creates an unequal destiny after death,” thus 
planting a seed that Christianity was destined to develop fully. In this way, the 
strange notion of immortality arose and spread in Greece as if immortality were a 
quality any mortal being’s soul was naturally endowed with; at the same time, the 
notion of “hero” was democratized to the point that in some regions (e.g., Boeotia) 
the title of “hero” was bestowed on men whose only “heroic” deed merely consisted 
in having died. 

In Greece Pythagoreanism represented in many ways a return of the Pelasgic 
spirit. Despite its astral and solar symbols (including a Hyperborean trace), the 
Pythagorean doctrine was essentially characterized by the Demetrian and pantheis¬ 
tic theme. After all, the lunar spirit of the Chaldean or Mayan priestly science was 
reflected in its view of the world in terms of numbers and of harmony; the dark, 
pessimistic, and fatalistic motif of tellurism was retained in the Pythagorean notion 
of birth on this earth as a punishment and as a sentence, and also in the teaching 
concerning reincarnation, which I have previously described as a symptom of a spiri¬ 
tual disease. The soul that repeated ly reincarnates is the soul subjected to the chthonic 
law. The doctrine of reincarnation exemplifies the emphasis Pythagoreanism and 
Orphism gave to the principle that is tellurically subjected to rebirth, as well as the 
truth proper to the civilization of the Mother. Pythagoras’s nostalgia for ideas of a 
Demetrian type (after his death his home became a sanctuary of the goddess Demeter), 
including the dignity that women enjoyed in Pythagorean sects where they presided 
over initiations and where the ritual cremation of the dead was forbidden, as well as 
the sect’s horror of blood—are features that can easily be explained on this basis. 12 
In this kind of context even the escape from the “cycle of rebirths” has a dubious 
character (it is significant that in Orphism the dwelling of the blessed is not above the 
earth, as in the Achaean symbol of the Elysian Fields, but rather under the earth, in 

1 1. Bachofen (Mutterrecht, 247-49) has brought to light an interesting thing, namely, that popular tyrants 
usually derived their power from a woman and succeeded each other according to a feminine line. This 
was one of signs of the relationship between democracy and gynaecocracy that is noticeable even in the 
cycle of the foreign kings in Rome. 

12. According to some, Pythagoras owed his doctrine to the teaching of a woman, Themistoclea (Diogenes 
Laertius, Life of Pythagoras, 5). He entrusted some women to teach doctrine, since he acknowledged 
their greater propensity to the divine cult; his community had forms that remind us of matriarchy (ibid., 
21, 8). Pliny (Natural History, 36.46) mentions that Pythagoras’s disciples started to practice again the 
chthonic ritual of burial. 


258 


259 



Genesis m Face of the Modem World 


The Heroic -Wmm Western Chcle 


the company of infernal gods) 11 in comparison to the ideal of immortality that was 
proper of “Zeus’s path”; at the end of this path there was a heavenly region or a 
Uranian world dominated by the “spiritual virility of the light” and inhabited by “those 
who are ” namely, beings who are detached and inaccessible in their perfection and 
purity. Generally speaking, Pindar’s words, “Do not try to become a god” (fir\ jdazevrj 
Beds XeveaGai), already betray a gradual lessening of the tension of the ancient 
heroic impulse toward transcendence. 

What I have mentioned so far are only a few of the many symptoms of a struggle 
between two worlds that in ancient Hellas did not come to a conclusive end. The 
Hellenic cycle had its “traditional” center 1 ' 1 in the Achaean Zeus, in Delphi, and in 
the Hyperborean cult of the light. Likewise, the Northem-Aryan spirit was preserved 
in the Hellenic ideals of culture as “form” and cosmos that prevails over chaos; it 
was associated with the heroic and solar myths and with an aversion for the indefi¬ 
nite, the limitless, the aneipov. The principle of the Delphic Apollo and Olympian 
Zeus, however, did not succeed in creating for itself a universal body or in ultimately 
defeating the element personified by the demon Python (whose ritual slaying was 
reenacted every eight years) and by that subterranean serpent that appears in the 
oldest stratum of the ritual of the Diasian Olympic festivity. Parallel to these views 
of culture as spiritual form, to heroic motifs, and to the speculative transpositions of 
the Uranian theme of the Olympian region, we find (a) the inexorable unfolding of 
Aphroditism, sensualism, Dionysism, and aestheticism; (b) the prevalence of the 
mystic and nostalgic orientation of the Orphic spirituality; (c) the theme of expiation; 
(d) the contemplative Demetrian-Pythagorean view of nature; and (e) the “virus” of 
democracy and antitraditionalism. 

On the one hand, although traces of the Northern-Aryan ethos were preserved 
in Hellenic traditionalism, on the other hand, in this context this individualism ap¬ 
peared as a limitation; nor was it able to withstand the influences of the ancient 
substratum because of which it eventually degenerated in an anarchist and destruc¬ 
tive sense; this was destined to happen many times in Italy until the Renaissance. 
What developed from the same northern path trodden by the Delphic Apollo was 
Alexander the Great’s attempt to organize Hellas in a unitary fashion into an em- 

13. If we keep in mind [he "Dionysization” undergone by the cult of Apollo in Delphi, which led to [he 
introduction of an anti-Olympian ritual of prophecies uttered through ecstatic or delirious women—then 
the very same traditions that tend to establish a relationship between Pythagoreanism and Apollonism 
(Pythagoras as “the one who leads the Pylhia,” or Pythagoras being identified with Apollo through his 
“golden thigh,” etc,) hardly contradict what has just been said. 

14. Delphi’s value of “pole” was obscurely perceived by the Hellenes since they regarded Delphi as the 
omphalos, or the “center” of the earth and of the world; in any event, they found in the Delphic amphitrionate 
the sacred bond that united them over and above the particularism of the individual city-states, 


pire. 15 In any event, the Greeks were not strong enough to uphold the universality 
that was intrinsic to the idea of the empire. The noXiq of the Macedonian empire 
dissolved instead of becoming integrated. In this noXiq too, unity and universality 
eventually had to confront that which paved the way for the first democratic and 
antitraditional crises; they acted in a destructive and leveling way instead of inte¬ 
grating that pluralistic and national element that provided a solid foundation for both 
the culture and tradition of individual Hellenic cities; it is here that the limitation of 
Greek individualism and particularism became especially evident. The reason for 
the caducity of Alexander’s empire, which could have been the principle of a great 
new Indo-European cycle, does not lie in a mere historical contingency. When this 
empire declined, the calm and solar purity of the ancient Hellenic ideal was only a 
memory of the past. The “torch” of tradition moved somewhere else. 

I have already pointed out the simultaneous crises that broke out in various 
traditions between the seventh and fifth centuries b.c.; all of a sudden it looked as if 
new aggregates of negative forces had emerged to sweep away a precarious world 
and begin a new era. Outside the West these forces were neutralized for the most 
part by reforms, restorations, or by new traditional manifestations; conversely, in the 
West they apparently succeeded in breaking the traditional dam, rushing forward, 
and ushering in the definitive collapse. I have previously discussed the decadence 
displayed by Egypt, the Mediterranean-Eastern cycle, and Israel; this decadence 
was destined to affect Greece too. In Greece, humanism (a characteristic theme of 
the Iron Age) made its appearance as a result of the emergence of religious senti¬ 
mentalism and the decline of ideals typical of a virile and sacral mankind. Human¬ 
ism eventually affected other dimensions of Hellenic life; it marked the advent of 
philosophical thought and of scientific inquiry. No traditional reaction worthy of be¬ 
ing remembered attempted to block the onslaught of these trends; 16 what occurred 
instead was a regular process of development of a secular and antitraditional criti¬ 
cism that may be compared to the spreading of a cancer in all the healthy and 
nonsecular teachings that Greece still preserved. 

Modem man may be unaware of it, but the preeminence of “thought ’ is only 
marginal and recent phenomenon in history—though not as recent as the tendency to 

15. It is significant that Apollonian Delphi, the traditional center of ancient Hellas, did not hesitate to abandon 
the “national cause” when it came in contact with civilizations that expressed the same spirit that it itsell 
embodied, such as in the fifth century, in favor of the Persians, and in the fourth century in favor of the 
Macedonians. The Persians, for their part, almost recognized their god in the Hyperborean Apollo; in 
Hellenism we often encounter the assimilation of Apollo to Mithras, and on the part of the Persians, of 
Ahura Mazda to Zeus, of Verethragna to Heracles, of Anahita to Artemis, and so on. This was much more 
than mere “syncretism.” 

16. In India, Buddhism opposed pragmatism and realism to priestly philosophical speculations around the 
same time the early Greek philosophers appeared on the scene. 


260 


261 



The HEROic-Umfln Weiterd C^cle 


look at nature in purely physical terms. The figures of the philosopher and the “physi¬ 
cist” arose as the products of a degeneration that reached an advanced stage in the 
last age, the Iron Age. That process of decentralization, which by following the pre¬ 
viously mentioned phases alienated man from his origins, was destined to end with 
the tiansfoimation of humankind from “beings” into “existences” whose center is 
“outside of themselves,” mere ghosts or “stumps” who nevertheless still nurture the 
illusion of being able to achieve truth, wholeness, and life through their own efforts 
In Hellas, the shift from the plane of “symbols” to the plane of “myths,” with their 
pei sonifications and latent aestheticism,” foreshadowed the first stage of decadence. 
Later on, after the gods were reduced to the rank of mythological figures, they were 
turned into philosophical concepts, that is, into pure abstractions or objects of exo¬ 
teric cults. The emancipation of the individual from Tradition under the guise of 
“thinker” and the affirmation of reason as an instrument of uninhibited criticism and 
profane knowledge arose on the margins of this historical development that found its 
early characteristic manifestations in Greece. 

The abovementioned trend reached a complete development only much later, 
that is, aftei the Renaissance; likewise, it was only with the advent of Christianity 
that humanism in the species of religious pathos became the dominant theme within 
an entire cycle of civilization. In Greece, however, philosophy had its center not so 
much within itself but in metaphysical and mysteriosophic elements that echoed 
traditional teachings; moreover, it always accompanied—even in Epicureanism and 
in Skepticism—elements of spiritual formation, asceticism, and autarchy, Neverthe¬ 
less the Greek “physicists” continued to engage in “theology”; only the ignorance of 
some modern historians could suppose that, for instance, Thales’ “water” or 
Anaximander’s “air”corresponded to the real material elements. Some, like Socrates, 
even attempted to turn the new hermeneutical principle against itself in order to 
attempt a partial reconstruction of the shattered order. 

Socrates believed that the philosophical concept could help overcome both the 
contingency of particular opinions and the individualistic and disintegrating element 
of Sophism, and at the same time help people find universal and superindividual 
truths. This attempt was destined to go wrong, however, and lead to an even more 
fatal deviation: the replacement of the spirit with discursive thought and the repre¬ 
sentation as true Being something that, although an image of Being, still remained 
nonbeing, a human and unreal creation, and a pure abstraction. And while thought 
openly exhibited its negative characteristics in some writers, 17 so much so as to rep¬ 
resent the visible symptom of a fall rather than a danger, the most dangerous seduc- 

H, Some, like Protagoras, claimed that “Man is the measure of all things" and employed this hermeneutical 
principle in an individualistic, destructive, and sophistical way. 


tion and the most deceptive illusion consisted in thought seeking to situate the Uni¬ 
versal and Being in the way that is proper to it (that is, rationally and philosophically) 
ancl to transcend through concept and rhetoric 1 * the particularism and contingency of 
the sensible world; this thought eventually became the instrument of that humanism 
and that profound and corruptive unrealism that centuries later completely seduced 
the Western world. 

The “objectivism” that some historians of philosophy decry in Greek thought was 
the support this thought derived, whether consciously or unconsciously, from traditional 
wisdom and from man's traditional attitude. Once this support collapsed, thought 
gradually became a reason unto itself, losing all transcendent and superrational ref¬ 
erences—until it eventually culminated in modern Rationalism and Kantian Criticism. 

Here I will mention in passing another aspect of the “humanistic” uphea val found 
in Greece: the development of the arts and literature in a hypertrophic, profane, and 
individualistic sense. When compared to the strength of the origins, this development 
should be regarded as a degeneration and disintegration. The peak of the ancient world 
is found wherever, next to a coarseness of external forms, an intimately sacral real¬ 
ity was translated without expressionism into the greatness of a clear and free world. 
Thus, the best period of Hellas corresponds to the so-called Greek Middle Ages, char¬ 
acterized by its epos and ethos, and by its ideals of Olympian spirituality and heroic 
transfiguration. The civilized and philosophical Greece, “Mother of the arts,” which 
the moderns admire so much ancl completely empathize with, was a crepuscular 
Greece. This was clearly perceived by those people who still retained the same vir¬ 
ile spirit of the Achaean era in a pure state, that is, by the original Romans; see for 
instance in the writings of Cato (234-149 b.c.) the expressions of contempt for the new 
breed of “philosophers” and men of letters . ]i) In many ways, the ITel lenization of Rome, 
under this aspect of humanistic and almost enlightened development promoted by 
poets, literatary types, and scholars, was a prelude of its own decadence. Generally 
speaking this was true, notwithstanding those sacral and symbolic elements that Greek 
art and literature occasionally retained beyond the individuality of some authors. 

The Roman Cycle 

Rome was founded during the period of the crises that surfaced everywhere in an¬ 
cient traditional civilizations. With the exception of the Holy Roman Empire, which 
was a Northern-Teutonic attempt to revive the ancient Roman ideal, Rome should 

18. I employ this term according to the sense that Michelstacdter (Ln persunsione e In rctoricn [Florence, C. 

1922J) gave to it; he vividly illustrated the sense of Socratic conceptual decadence and philosophical 

evasiveness vis-a-vis the doctrine of “being” as defended by the Eleatics. 

19. Gellius, 18.7.3, 


262 


263 



Gras nnD Fuce of the Modem UJorld 


The HcROic-URflnifln Weftemi (me 


be regarded as the last great reaction against such a crisis, and also as the attempt_ 

successful for an entire cycle—to wrest a group of people from the forces of deca¬ 
dence at work in Mediterranean civilizations and organize them into a unitary whole, 
thereby realizing on a stronger and more grandiose scale that which the power of 
Alexander the Great succeeded in creating for only a short while. 

The ultimate significance of Rome will elude us unless we first perceive the 
heterogeneity between what constituted the central course of its development and 
the traditions proper to the majority of the Italic populations among which Rome 
arose and affirmed itself , 20 

It has been correctly pointed out that the pre-Roman Italian peninsula was in¬ 
habited by Etruscans, Sabines, Sabeilians, Volscians, and Samnites, as well as by 
Phoenicians, Siculians and Sicani, Greek and Syrian immigrants in the south—when 
all of a sudden, without knowing how or why, a conflict erupted within all these 
populations and their cults, views of the law, and claims to political supremacy; a 
new principle appeared, powerful enough to subjugate everything in its path, to trans¬ 
form deeply the ancient customs and way of life, and which enjoyed an unrestrained 
and almost predestined expansion typical of the great forces of history. No one ever 
mentions the source of this principle and the only references to the origins, which still 
fail to explain this phenomenon, are confined to an empirical and sociological plane; 
therefore, those who stand in awe before the Roman “miracle” as an event to be 
admired rather than to be explained, do better than those who attempt to explain it 
through secondary causes. 

Behind the greatness of Rome we can recognize forces of the heroic Aryan- 
Western cycle at work; behind its decadence we can see the alteration of these same 
forces. Naturally, in a mixed-up world far removed from its origins, it is necessary to 
refer essentially to a superhistorical idea, which is, however, capable of acting in 
history in a formative way; in this sense we can talk of the presence in Rome of an 
Aryan element and of its struggle against the forces of the South. Our research can¬ 
not be based merely on the racial and ethnic plane. It has been ascertained that prior 
to the Celtic migrations and the Etruscan cycle, nuclei that derived immediately 
from the boreal, Western race made their appearance in Italy; these nuclei, com¬ 
pared to the aboriginal races and the crepuscular by-products of the paleo-Mediter- 
ranean civilization of Atlantic origins, had the same meaning as the appearance of 
the Dorians and Achaeans in Greece. The traces of these nuclei visibly point to the 
Hyperborean cycle and to the “civilization of the reindeer” and “battle-axe.” More- 

20. This opposition was the central thesis of Bachofen’s Die Sage von Tanaquil (Heidelberg, 1870). In the 
next few pages 1 have borrowed and incorporated into a traditional conceptual framework several ideas 
of Bachofen’s concerning the meaning and the mission of Rome in the West. 


over, it is likely that the ancient Latins represented a surviving vein or a reemer¬ 
gence of these nuclei variously intermingled with other Italic populations; in any 
event, we must refer to the plane of the “spiritual race.” The type of the Roman 
civilization and the Roman man bear witness to the presence and power within this 
civilization, and also to the same force that was at the center of the heroic, Uranian 
cycles of Northern and Western origin. As dubious as the racial homogeneity of 
Rome in the origins may be, there is no question concerning the formative action this 
force exercised on the “material” to which it was applied, elevating it to and differ¬ 
entiating it from what belonged to a different world. 

There are numerous elements that show the connection between both the Italic 
civilizations among which Rome arose and the residues of these civilizations in the 
early Roman world on the one hand, and the type of southern civilizations in their 
telluric, Aphrodistic, and Demetrian variations, on the other hand . 21 

The cult of the Goddess, which in Greece was typical of the Pelasgic compo¬ 
nent, most likely played an important role among the Siculians and the Sabines. The 
greatest deity of the Sabines was the chthonic 'goddess Fortuna, who reappeared in 
the forms of Horta, Feronia, Vesuna, Heruntas, the Horae, Hera, Juno, Venus, Ceres, 
Bona Dea, Demeter—all of which are reincarnations of the same divine principle. 
The oldest Roman calendar was of a lunar type, and the early Roman myths had 
plenty of feminine figures: Mater Matuta, Luna, Diana, Egeria—moreover, in the 
traditions concerning Mars-HercuLes and Flora, Hercules and Larenlia, Numa and 
Egeria, as well as in other traditions, the archaic theme of the subordination of the 
masculine to the feminine principle was also present in the background. These myths 
derived from pre-Roman traditions such as the Etruscan saga of Tanaquil, in which 
we find the type of the regal Asian-Mediterranean woman that Rome attempted to 
purify from its Aphrodistic traits and transform into a symbol of all the maternal 
virtues . 22 These transformations that the Roman world was responsible for with re¬ 
gard to everything that was incompatible with its spirit, however, still did not perma¬ 
nently remove from underneath the recent stratum of the myth an even older stratum 
that was connected with a civilization opposed to the Roman one; this stratum can 
be recognized in the regal succession through the female line or in women’s advent 
to the throne (these being typical features of primitive Rome), especially in relation 
to foreign dynasties and to kings bearing plebeian names. According to a legend, 
Servius Tullius, who achieved power thanks to a woman and became a champion of 

21. Bachofen’s work showed the analogy with civilizations of the eastern Mediterranean. Mosso noticed a 
general relationship between the Aegean (pre-Hellenic) civilization and the pre-Roman Italic civilization. 

22. According to Livy (1.34), in the cult of Tanaquil the Etruscan women exercised the role of priestesses; this 
is a typical trait of the Pelasgic civilization. 


264 


265 



kmu AnD Face op the (Hodpro World 


The HEROK-Umwn Westerh Cljcle 


plebeian rights, was illegitimately conceived during one of the many orgiastic feasts 
celebrated by slaves who devoted themselves to the cult of Southern deities (chthonic 
Saturn, Venus, and Flora) and who celebrated the return of mankind to the law of 
universal brotherhood and the promiscuity of the great Mother of Life. 

The Etruscans and the Sabines have left traces of a matriarchical system. Their 
inscriptions often reveal (as in Crete) filiation through the name of the mother instead 
of the father, and also the attribution of a particular honor, authority, importance, and 
freedom to women. Numerous Italic cities were named after women. The ritual of 
burial, as opposed to that of cremation (both of which were found in the ancient Ro¬ 
man world), was probably one of the many signs indicating the presence of two over- 
lapping strata representing a Uranian and a Demetrian view of the afterlife, 
respectively; these strata were often mixed together even though they retained their 
unmistakable features . 23 What in Rome was retained as maternal sacredness and 
authority ( mationarum sanctitas, or mater prmceps familiae ), rather than being a 
Roman feature, betrays the pre-Roman and gynaecocratic component that in the new 
civilization was subordinated to the paternal right and thus put in its proper place. This 
did not, however, prevent the opposite process from taking place in other cases: while 
on the one hand the Roman Satum-Kronos retained some of his original traits, on the 
other hand he was portrayed as a telluric demon, and as the husband of Ops, the Earth. 
The same was true for Mars and the often contradictory varieties of the cult of Her¬ 
cules. In all probability Vesta was a feminine version (due to a Southern influence) 
of the deity of fire, who always had a prevalent masculine and Uranian character 
among Aryan populations; this version even led to the association of this deity with 
Bona Dea, who was worshiped as a goddess of the Earth and secretly celebrated at 
night. It is said that men were forbidden to participate in this cult and even forbidden 
to pronounce the name of the goddess . 24 Tradition attributed to a non-Roman king, the 
Sabine Titus Tatius, the introduction into Rome of the most important chthonic cults 
such as those of Ops and Flora, Re and Juno Curis, Luna, the chthonic Kronos, Diana, 
and Vulcan, and even of the lares ; 25 likewise the libri Sibillini (or Jibri fatales ), of 

23. The Roman gens that remained faithful to the ritual of inhumation was the gens Cornelia, whose charac¬ 
teristic cult was that of the telluric Venus. 

24. The most ancient root of the cult of Bona Dea, a deity who at first was venerated in a chaste Demetrian 
form, recmerged in a decadent period of Roman history during which her cult came to be associated with 
uninhibited sexual promiscuity. Concerning Vesta, just as the maternal dignity of this goddess was re¬ 
spected and yet subordinated to the authority of the patres, likewise her cult was subjected to the pontifex 
mngnus first and to the emperor later. After all, the official cult of fire in the time of Romulus was 
entrusted to priests; it became the legacy of the vestal virgins only as a decision of the Sabine and lunar 
king Numa. Emperor Julian (Hymn to King Helios , 155a) eventually restored its solar character. 

25. Varro, 5.74. In this context the hires are to be understood in their chthonic aspect. It would be interesting 
to examine the mixture of the telluric element, which is an Etruscan-Pelasgic remnant, with the “heroic 1 ’ 
and patrician element in the Roman funerary cult. Also it would be interesting to analyze the phases of 


Asiatic-Southern origin, which were sympathetic to the plebeian component of the 
Roman religion, were responsible for introducing the Great Mother and other deities 
of the chthonic cycle: Dis Pater, Flora, Saturn, and the triad Ceres-Liber-Libera. 

The strong pre-Aryan, Aegean-Pelasgic, and partially “Atlantic” component, 
which can be detected from an ethnic and philological view in these populations that 
Rome encountered in Italy, still remains a fact to be reckoned with; the relationship 
between these populations and the original Roman nucleus was similar to that which 
occun-ed in Greece between the Pelasgian stocks on the one hand and the Achaean and 
Doric stocks on the other. According to a tradition, after being scattered, the Pelasgians 
often became slaves of other people; in Lucania and in Brutium they formed the ma¬ 
jority of the Bruttians, who were subjugated by the Sabellians and by the Samnites. 
Interestingly enough, these Bruttians sided with the Chartaginenses in their struggle 
against Rome in one of the most important episodes in the conflict between North and 
South; following their defeat, the Bruttians were eventually sold into slavery. Just as in 
India the aristocracy of the arya stood before the servile caste like a dominating stock 
stands before an aboriginal stock, in the same way in the Roman opposition between 
patricians and plebeians we may see an analogous phenomenon and thus consider the 
plebeians as the “Pelasgians of Rome.” The evidence suggests that the plebeians in 
Rome were inspired by the maternal, feminine, and material principle, while the pa¬ 
triciate derived its superior dignity from the paternal right. The plebs succeeded in 
becoming part of the state and even participating in the ius Quiritiutn, but never in the 
political and juridical institutions connected to the superior chrism of the patricians (the 
reader will recall the saying patrem clere posse in reference to divine ancestors, the so- 
called divi parentes, who were the prerogative of the patriciate and not of the plebs, 
which instead was considered to be made up of the “children of the Earth”). 

Even if a direct ethnic relationship between Pelasgians and Etruscans 26 is not 


the process of purification through which the lares lost their original pre-Roman, Lelluric (the lares as the 
“children” of Acca Larentia, the equivalent of Bona Dea), and plebeian (a characteristic of the cult of the 
lares was that slaves played an important role in it and at times were even the officiating celebrants) 
character and thus assumed more and more the character of “divine spirits,” “heroes,” and souls that had 
overcome death. Augustine, City of God, 9. 11. 

26. The most widespread classical tradition during the imperial era of Rome attributed an Asiatic origin to the 
Etruscans, in a way that can be summed up in Seneca’s words; “Tuscos Asia sibi indicat,” According to 
some, the Etruscans belonged to the stock of the Tursha, seafolk whose dwelling was located in some 
island or region of the eastern Mediterranean and who invaded Egypt toward the end of the Eighteenth 
Dynasty. According to a more recent and reliable opinion, the Etruscans were the remnants of a popula¬ 
tion that preexisted those Italic nuclei that had come from the north; this population was scattered in 
Spain, along the Tyrrhenian Sea, in Asia Minor and even along the Caucasus (from the Basques, to the 
Liddi and the Hittites); in that case they belong to the Atlantic-Pelasgic cycle. Other scholars, such as 
Altheim and Mosso, talk about the kinship existing between the Etruscan and Minoan civilizations not 
only because of the privileged role that women played in the cult, but also because of affinities that are 
evident in their architecture, art, and customs. 


266 


267 



Gehesis mid Face oe the IHodem UJorld 


The Heroie-Uruhihti Western Cycle 


persuasively demonstrated, the latter people, to whom Rome, according to many 
scholars, was heavily indebted, display the traits of a telluric and at most lunar and 
priestly civilization that can hardly be reconciled with the central line and with the 
spirit of the Roman world. It is true that the Etruscans, like the Assyrians and the 
Chaldeans, in addition to the telluric world of fertility and of the various Mothers of 
Nature, also knew a Uranian pantheon of masculine deities ruled by Tinia. Never¬ 
theless, these deities (diJ conserves) were very different from Olympian deities; they 
did not possess any real sovereignty and were more like shadows dominated by an 
occult power that cannot be named, which overshadows everything else and subjects 
everything to the rules of the dii supetiores et involuti. Thus, Etruscan Uranianism 
betrayed the spirit of the South in the same fatalistic and naturalistic way as in the 
case of the Pelasgic view of the generated Zeus who was subjected to the Stygian 
king Pluto, ruler of the underworld. The subordination of all beings, even divine 
ones, to a principle that shuns the light like the womb of the earth and whose law 
rules supreme over those who arise from it into a contingent life, was typical of the 
spirit of the South. Thus, we find a return to the shadow of Isis, who warned: “No one 
will be able to dissolve what I turn into a law ,” 27 and to those Hellenic feminine 
deities, the creatures of the Night and of Erebus, who embodied the destiny and the 
sovereignty of natural law. At the same time tire demonic and magical aspect that 
played a relevant role in the Etruscan cult through forms that contaminated the 
solar motifs and symbols reveals the role played in that civilization by the pre-Indo- 
European element, even in its lowest characteristics. 

In reality, the Etruscans living at the time of the birth of Rome had very few 
redeeming heroic and solar characteristics. They could only view the world in a sad 
and gloomy way; besides the terror they had of the afterlife, they were so obsessed 
by the sense of an incumbent destiny and by expiation that they even predicted the 
end of their own nation . 28 The union of the theme of eros with that of death is found 
among the Etruscans in a characteristic fashion: they enjoyed with a voluptuous frenzy 
a fleeting life, dulled by ecstasies dominated by the infernal forces whose presence 
they were reminded of all the time. The priestly leaders of the Etruscan clans 
(lucumoni) regarded themselves as the children of the Earth; a chthonic demon 

27. Dio, Roman History, 1.27. Sec Eil.so M. Pallottino, Etruscologiii (Milan, 1942), 175-81. This author, in 
addition to “an abandonment and almost, an abdication of spiritual human activity before the deity,’’ also 
noticed the gloomy and pessimistic Etruscan view of the afterlife, which did not know any hopes of 
immortality and heavenly survival for anybody, including the most exalted people. 

28. Concerning the pathos of the afterlife, G. Dc Sanctis (Storia dei Romani, 1.147) explained that a charac¬ 
teristic of the Etruscan soul was the "terror of the afterlife, which was expressed through figurations of 
dreadful demons, like the monster Tuchulcha, and through macabre portrayals that anticipate the medi¬ 
eval ones.” 


(Tages ) 29 was traditionally credited with founding the “Etruscan discipline,” or 
aruspicina, This discipline, the texts of which “filled with fear and horror” its stu¬ 
dents, was part of that type of fatalistic, lunar science typical of the Chaldean priest¬ 
hood and that was eventually transmitted to the Hittites; the aruspicina show evident 
analogies with the latter science even from the technical point of view of some 
procedures . 30 

The fact that Rome partially incorporated such elements into the augural sci¬ 
ence that was the privilege of the patriciate, and that it allowed the Etruscan 
haruspexes to practice their art and did not disdain to consult them, reveals not only 
the different meaning that things may have when they are integrated in the context 
of a different civilization, but also a compromise and an antithesis that were often 
latent in the Roman world and that sometimes were often actualized and made evi¬ 
dent. In reality, the revolt against the Tarquinians represented a revolt of aristocratic 
Rome against the Etruscan component; the expulsion of that dynasty was celebrated 
every year in Rome with a feast similar to the feast with which the Persians cel¬ 
ebrated the Megaphonia, which was the massacre of the Median priests who had 
usurped the regality after the death of Cambyses. 

The Romans were always diffident to and fearful of the haruspex, as if he were 
an occult enemy of Rome. Among the many episodes concerning this uneasy rela¬ 
tionship, we may recall the time when the haruspexes wanted to have the statue of 
Horatius Codes buried because of their hatred toward Rome; however, when con¬ 
trary to the haruspicium, the statue was erected on the most elevated place and 
happy events befell Rome, the haruspexes were charged with betrayal and after 
confessing, were executed. 

Thus, Rome departed from the background of the Italic populations of its origins 
that were still connected to the spirit of the ancient Southern civilizations, thereby 
manifesting a new influence that can hardly be traced to its background. This influ¬ 
ence, however, could only be exercised through a harsh struggle, both inner and 
outer, and a series of reactions, adaptations, and transformations. The ideal of con¬ 
quering virility was embodied in Rome. This virility was manifested in the doctrine 
of the state and in the notions of auctoritas and imperium . The state was under the 
aegis of the Olympian deities (particularly the Capitoline Jupiter, who was detached, 
sovereign, ungenerated, and exempt from any naturalistic myths and generations) 
and originally it was not separated from the initiatory “mystery” of regality (adytum 
et initia regis) that had been declared inaccessible to ordinary people. The imperium 

29. Ovid, Metamorphosis, 15.553. 

30. According to Piganiol, in the methods of Roman divination there must have been an opposition between 
the Uranian and patrician ritual of the augurs and the chthonic ritual of the Etruscan haruspexes. 


268 


269 



GEIlEill MID fflCE OF THE fTlODERn UUORLD 


The Heroic-Uraim UJestem Cejcle 


(notin the hegemonical and territorial sense of the word) was understood in terms of 
power and the mystical and dreadful force of command that was the prerogative not 
only of political leaders (in whom it retained its immaterial character, beyond the 
often irregular and spurious variety of techniques used to attain it), but of the patri¬ 
cians and of the heads of households. The Roman symbol of fire reflected a similar 
spirituality, as did the strict paternal right and the articulations of a law that Vico did 
not hesitate to call “heroic law, 5 ’ since it informed the Roman ethic of honor and 
faithfulness. This ethic was felt so strongly that, according to Livy, it eventually 
became a trademark of the Roman people; whereas lacking a fides and following 
the contingencies of fate characterized by those whom the Romans referred to as 
“barbarians .” 31 The early Romans characteristically perceived the supernatural as 
nuwen (as sheer power) rather than as deus; this represents the counterpart of a 
peculiar spiritual attitude. Other characteristics of the Roman world included the 
absence of pathos, lyricism and mysticism toward the divine, the presence of precise 
law for the necessary and necessitating rite, and clear and sober views. In their re¬ 
flection of a virile and “magical” attitude , 32 these themes corresponded to the themes 
found in the early Vedic, Chinese, and Iranian periods and to the Achaean-Olym¬ 
pian litual as well. The typical Roman religion had always been diffident toward the 
abandonment of the soul in God and toward the outbursts of devotion; it restrained, 
by force if necessary, anything that diminished that serious dignity proper to the 
relations between a clvis Romanvs and a god. Although the Etruscan component 
attempted to influence the plebeian strata of society by introducing the pathos of 
terrifying representations of the netherworld, Rome, at its best, remained faithful to 
the heroic view proper to early Hellas. Rome had personified heroes, but it also 
knew the impertuibability of mortal men who had no fear and no hopes concerning 
the afterlife, and who could not be dissuaded from a conduct inspired by duty, fides, 
heroism, older, and dominion. A proof of this consisted in the good reception ac¬ 
corded to Lucretius' Epicureanism, in which the explanation of reality in terms of 
natural causes aimed at eliminating the fear of death and the gods and at freeing 

3 1. Livy, 22.22.6, Fides—in its various forms, such as Fides Romana, Fides Publica, and so on—was one of 
the most ancient deities of Rome, 

32. In this context ‘ magic” is understood in the higher sense of the word and is referred to the official Roman 
religion, which according to some, consisted in a sheer “formalism” lacking religious pathos; on the 
contrary, it expressed the ancient law of pure action. The Roman persecutions against magic and astrol¬ 
ogy only concerned inferior forms of religion, that were often superstitious or quackish. In reality, a 
magical attitude understood as an attitude of command and action upon invisible forces through the pure 
determinism of the ritual, constituted the essence of the early Roman religion and the Roman view of the 
sacred. Later on, though the Romans opposed the popular and superstitious forms of magic, they contin¬ 
ued to have a great respect for the patrician cult and for the figure of the theurgist, who was shrouded with 
dignity and with ascetical purity. 


human life by bestowing upon it calmness and a sense of security. Even in doctrines 
like Epicureanism we find a view of the gods reflecting the Olympian ideal of im¬ 
passive and detached essences that the wise regarded as models of perfection. 
While next to other peoples such as the Greeks and the Etruscans the Romans 
may at first have appeared as “barbariansA their lack of “culture” concealed (as in 
the case of some Germanic populations at the time of the barbarian invasions) an 
even older force that acted in a style compared to which all cultures of an urban type 
appeared as decadent and disaggregative. The first account of Rome that Greece 
ever had came from an ambassador who confessed that although he had expected to 
sit in the Roman Senate as it he were in a gathering of barbarians, he felt instead like 
being in the midst of an assembly of kings . 33 Thus, although secret signs of Tradition 
appeared in Rome from the start in invisible ways , 34 nevertheless, the very epics and 
history of Rome, rather than its cultural theories and assumptions, contributed to 
express the truer "myth” of Rome and to give witness in a more immediate way 
(almost as if through a series of great symbols sculpted by the power in the very 
substance of history) to Lhe spiritual struggle that forged the destiny and the great¬ 
ness of this “eternal” city. All the phases of Rome’s development represented con¬ 
quests of the victorious Indo-European spirit; in the greatest historical and military 
tensions we find the best manifestations of this spirit, even when the life of Rome 
was already altered because of exogenous influences and plebeian unrest. 

From the beginning the myth presents elements that contain a deep meaning 
and indicate the two opposite forces at work in Rome. There is an interesting tradi- 

33, Plutarch, Phyrm, 17.6. In the episode of the Gallic invasion, the countenance of the elders was described 
by Livy as "more than human,” and as "very similar to the gods’” (6.4 I). 

34. See tor instance: (a) the "sign of the center," the black stone Romulus put at the beginning of the Via 
Sacra; (b)tlic fatidie and solar "twelve,” which was the number of vultures that gave Romulus the right to 
name the new city; the number of the lictorian fasces carrying an axe, the symbol of the Hyperborean 
conquerors; the number, instituted by Numa.ofthe uncilia (sacred shields) which were the pignora imperii 
(the pledge of command); and the number of the altars in the archaic cult of Janus; (c) the eagle, sacred to 
the god of bright skies, Jupiter, and also the signtun of the Roman legions, which was also one of the 
Aryan symbols of the immortalizing “glory”; this is why the souls of the deceased Caesars were believed 
to take the form of an eagle and to fly into solar immortality; (d) the sacrifice of the horse, which corre¬ 
sponds to the asvanictlha of the Indo-Aryans; (e) many other elements of a universal sacred tradition. 

In regard to eagles, in ancient traditions we find the belief that the person on whom an eagle came to 
rest was predestined by Zeus to high offices or to regality and that the sight of an eagle was an omen of 
victory, The eagle was such a universal symbol that among the Aztecs it indicated the location for the 
capital of the new empire. The bn, the element of the human being destined to lead a heavenly eternal 
li fe in a state of glory, was often represented in Egyptian hieroglyphics as a sparrow hawk, which was the 
Egyptian equivalent of the eagle. In the Rg Veda (4.18.12; 4.27.2) the eagle carried the magic potion to 
Jndra that consecrated him as the Lord of all gods, leaving behind infernal feminine forces. From a 
doctrinal point of view, this could be compared to the esoteric meaning of the Roman imperial apotheosis 
(consecnitio) in which the flight of the eagle from the funeral pyre symbolized the deceased soul’s ensu¬ 
ing deification. 


270 


271 



GtntJij flriD Pace op the fTloDERn UJorld 


The Hooic-URflninn IUestera Cycle 


tion according to which Satum-Kronos created Satumia, which was regarded as a 
city and at times as a fortress and was supposedly located where Rome was eventu¬ 
ally built; for this purpose, this god allegedly employed a hidden power (latens deus) 
that was present in Latium. 35 Concerning the legend of the birth of Rome, in the story 
of King Numitor and Amulius we already find the theme of the antagonist couple; 
Amulius seems to embody the violent principle, evident in his attempted usurpation 
of Numitor, who in turn corresponds to a great degree to the regal and sacred prin¬ 
ciple. The duality is found again in the couple Romulus and Remus. Here we have a 
characteristic theme of the heroic cycles, since the two brothers were generated 
from an intercourse between a virgin in charge of tending the sacred fire and the 
warrior god Mars. Second, we find the historical and metaphysical theme of being 
“rescued from the waters.” Third, the fig tree Ruminal, under which the twins take 
refuge, corresponds to the universal symbol of the Tree of Life and the supernatural 
nourishment that it grants; in ancient Latin, the attributive ruminus was given to 
Jupiter, and it signified his role as “he who gives nourishment.” The twins were fed 
by a she-wolf. I have already described the double meaning of the symbolism of the 
wolf; not only in the classical world, but also in the Celtic and Nordic world, the 
themes of the wolf and the light were often intertwined to the point that the wolf 
came to be associated with the Hyperborean Apollo. Moreover, the wolf represents 
a wild force, an elemental and unrestrained power; in Nordic mythology the “Age of 
the Wolf” designated the age in which the rebellious elemental powers are out of 
control. 

The duality latent in the principle that nourishes the twins corresponds to the 
duality of Romulus and Remus, Osiris and Set, Cain and Abel, and so on. 36 Romulus 
marked the boundaries of the city with a sacred rite based on a principle symbolizing 
order, limit, and law. Remus was disrespectful of this delimitation and was killed by 
his brother. This was the first episode and the prelude of a dramatic, internal and 
external, spiritual and social struggle (partially well known, partially represented by 
silent symbols) on the part of Rome to generate a universal heroic tradition in the 
Mediterranean world. 

The mythical account of the period of the kings of Rome indicates the antago¬ 
nism between a heroic and warrior aristocratic principle and the element connected 
with the plebeians, ‘ the Pelasgians of Rome,” and the lunar, priestly component (of 

35. Pliny said. Satumia ubi hue Roma esi. 'Virgil ( Aeneid, 357-58): “Hanc Janus pater, hanc Satumus 
condjdit arcem: Janiculum huic, illi fuerat Satumia nomen. ” 

36. Set, the dark brother who killed Osiris, was also called Typhon. According to Plutarch: "They called 
Typhon 'Set’; for this name, which denotes overpowering and violence, also denotes frequent return and 
overleaping. De Jside et Osiride, 49. The enemies of the solar principle (Ra), who were called “the 
children of the hopeless revolt,” were associated with Set. 


an Etruscan-Sabine origin); this antagonism was expressed as well in geographical 
terms, namely, by the Palatine and by the Aventine. It was from the Palatine that 
Romulus saw the symbol of the twelve vultures that bestowed on him supremacy 
over Remus, who had chosen the Aventine for himself. After Remus’s death, the 
duality seems to reemerge in the form of a compromise in the pair Romulus-Tatius; 
Tatius was the king of the Sabines, a people of a prevalently telluric and lunar cult. 
Following Romulus’s death, a war erupted between the Albans (a warrior stock of 
Nordic type) and the Sabines. Moreover, according to the ancient Italic tradition, it 
was on the Palatine that Hercules met the good king Evander (who had erected on it 
a temple dedicated to the goddess Victory) after slaying Cacus, the son of the Pelasgic 
god of chthonic fire, and after erecting in the latter’s cave, located on the Aventine, 
an altar to the Olympian god. 37 The same Hercules, as “triumphal Hercules” and the 
sworn enemy of Bona Dea, was destined to play a significant role, together with 
Jupiter, Mars, and Apollo, in the theme of the Roman Uranian and virile spirituality 
and thus came to be celebrated in rituals from which women were excluded. 38 

Moreover, the Aventine, the mountain of the slain Cacus and of Remus, was 
also the mountain sacred to the Goddess; on top of it was the most important temple 
of Diana-Luna, the great goddess of the night, which was founded by Servius Tullius, 
the plebeian king and the friend of the people. The plebeians who rebelled against 
the patriciate took refuge in this temple; in this temple slaves celebrated feasts in 
honor of Servius Tullius; on the Aventine other feminine cults were also established, 
such as those of Bona Dea, Carmenta, Juno Regina (392 b.c.) —a deity imported 
from the vanquished Vejo and of whom the Romans in the beginning were not veiy 
fond—or of telluric and virile cults, such as that of Faunus. 

The succession of the legendary kings of Rome is a sequence of episodes in the 
struggle between two principles. After Romulus, who was transformed into a “hero” 
in the guise ol Quirinus—the “undefeated god,” of whom Caesar considered himself 
an incarnation—we find in Numa the reemergence of the lunar type of the regal 
Etruscan-Pelasgian priest who was guided by the feminine principle (the Hegeria) 
and who anticipated the scission between the regal and the priestly powers. 30 In 
Tullus Hostilius, however, we can see the symptoms of the reaction of the character¬ 
istic Roman virile principle against the Etruscan priestly principle; this king appeared 

37. According toPiganiol the duel between Hercules and Cacus may have been a legendary transposition of 
the struggle between an Aryan or Aryan-like stock and an aboriginal stock of a Pelasgic origin. 

38. Macrobius, Saturnalia, 1.12.27. 

39. After Numa, the king (who originally ranked higher than the flainines, who in turn corresponded to the Hindi 
brShmana) was opposed to the rex sacrorum, who during that period was an expression of the plebeian ritua 
rather than a priest of the patrician rite; he was the mediator between the people and the great plebeia 
goddess, the Moon, who did not own the spectio (the right to inspect the aruspicina, which was an attribute 
typical of the patricians) and who, according to the ritual, ranked below the vestal virgins. 


272 


273 



tasis id Face of iae IHoderu World 


The Heroic-Uraium Western Cljcle 


as the type of the impera tor and the warrior leader. Although Tully died because he 
climbed an altar and caused a thunderbolt to rend the sky (which was the prerogative 
of the priests), the symbolism of his gesture alluded to the attempt to reintegrate the 
Sacred within the warrior aristocracy. Conversely, in the Etruscan dynasty of the 
Tarquinians the themes of the woman and of a regality often favoring the plebeian 
strata against the aristocracy became predominant in Rome. 40 

A fundamental event in the history of Rome was the revolt of the Roman patri¬ 
ciate (509 B.c.), which, after killing Servius, expelled the second Tarquin, put an end 
to the foreign dynasty, and broke the yoke of the previous civilization—almost at the 
same time as the expulsion of the popular tyrants and of the Doric restoration in 
Athens (510 b.c.). After this, it is of little importance to follow the development of 
inner struggles and the alternation of patrician resistance and plebeian usurpation in 
Rome. The center shifted from the inside to the outside. Rather than the compromise 
that some institutions and laws represented until the imperial age, we should con- 
sider the “myth” represented by the historical process of the growth ofRome’s great¬ 
ness. Despite the endurance or the infiltration into Rome’s social network of a heter¬ 
ogenous and Southern element, the political structures in which this element took a 
finn hold were nevertheless affected; eventually, they were either inexorably de- 
stioyed or swept away by a different, antithetical, and nobler civilization. 

To this effect, all we have to do is think about the unusual and significant vio¬ 
lence with which Rome destroyed the centers of the previous civilization, especially 
the Eti use an ones, successfully wiping out all traces of their previous power, their 
traditions, and even their languages. Like Alba, so did Vejo (the city of Queen Juno), 41 
Tarquinia, and Lucumonia disappear from history. In this destruction we find the 
sense of a destiny fulfilled, being methodically earned out more than merely con¬ 
templated, by a race that always believed that its greatness and good fortune were 
due to divine forces. Next to fall was Capua, which was the center of Southern weak¬ 
ness and opulence, the personification of the “culture” of the aesthetic and 

40. I will refer the reader to Bachofen’s work regarding the relationships between the feminine figures and 
the kings of the foreign dynasty. I will only add that the name Servius (Servius Tullius) originally indi¬ 
cated a son of slaves, just like the name Brutus (the name of the first tribune of the plebs was Junius 
Brutus and after the first year this name never appeared again in the consular lists) was given to rebel¬ 
lious slaves of Pelasgic stock. There is also a significant (for the plebeian element) telluric theme empha¬ 
sized by tradition, according to which after the oracle announced that he who kissed his own mother 
would become king, Brutus knelt to the ground and kissed the earth, whom he conceived as the Mother of 
all; likewise, the plebeians and the Etruscan lucumoni were regarded as children of the earth, Besides, 
isn’t it curious that centuries later the first person who attempted to usurp the legitimate authority in 
Rome himself carried the name of the rebellious Pelasgic slaves, namely, Brutus? 

41. Piganiol rightly observed that the struggle of Rome against Vejo represented the struggle of Apollo 
against the Goddess; a similar meaning seems to be given by Livy (5.23.5-8) who related that Camillas, 
after conquering Vejo, was regarded as a solar deity. 


Aphroditized Greece no longer under Doric influence; that civilization was destined 
to seduce and weaken a segment of the Roman patriciate. The two traditions clashed 
especially during the Punic wars in the form of political realities and powers. With 
the destruction of Carthage, which was (146 b.c.) the city of the Goddess (Astarte- 
Tanit) and the regal woman (Dido) who had tried to seduce the legendary forefather 
of the Roman nobility—we may say with Bachofen 42 that Rome shifted the center of 
the historical West from the telluric to the Uranian mystery, from the lunar world of 
the Mothers, to the solar world of the Fathers. The original and invisible seed of the 
Roman race actualized an inner formation of life with an ethos and a law that 
consolidated this meaning despite the continuous and subtle action of the opposite 
element. Truthfully, the Roman right of the conquering arms, together with the mys¬ 
tical view of victory, was radically antithetical to Etruscan fatalism and to any con¬ 
templative abandonment. The virile idea of the state took hold in opposition to any 
hieratic, Demetrian form, nevertheless retaining in all of its structures the chrism 
proper to a sacred and ritual element. This idea strengthened the soul and made the 
whole life vastly superior to all naturalistic elements. The asceticism of “action” 
developed in the traditional forms that I mentioned before; it even permeated the 
articulations of the corporate organizations with a sense of discipline and military 
style. Gens and famiha were organized according to the strict paternal right; the 
heart of society consisted in the pa Wes, who were the priests of the sacred fire, the 
arbiters of justice, and the military leaders of their own people and of their slaves or 
clients, and the highly visible elements of the aristocratic Senate. The civitas itself, 
which was the embodiment of the law, was nothing but rhythm, order, and number; 
the mystical numbers three, ten, twelve, and their multiples formed the basis of its 
political divisions. 

Although Rome did not succeed in shrugging off the influence of the librisibiJlini 
(or libri fatales), which represented the Asiatic element mixed with a spurious Helle¬ 
nism allegedly introduced by the second Tarquin (these books met the taste of the 
plebeian rite by introducing new and equivocal deities in the ancient and exclusive 
patrician cult), nevertheless, Rome reacted wherever the inimical element clearly 
manifested itself and threatened its deepest reality. Thus, Rome (a) fought against 

42. In the example of Rome following the libri sibillini and welcoming the Phrygian Great Goddess (as it did 
before with the Asiatic goddess of prostitution, following the defeat at Lake Trasimene) in order to facili¬ 
tate a victory over Hannibal, Bachofen saw an Aphrodistic city that was almost afraid of having ne¬ 
glected the Mother for such a long time and of having consecrated itself entirely to the virile principle of 
the imperium. This is possible. On the other hand, we should not forget that according to the Romans a 
war could not truly be won other than by evoking and drawing to their side the gods of the enemy; the 
great Phrygian goddess was a copy of the Punic Tanil. The cult of that goddess was incorporated into the 
Roman world only later on and it spread among the plebeian classes especially. 


274 


275 


Genesis imd Face oe the Modem UJorld 


The Heroic-Ururii QJesterh (hue 


the Bacchic and Aphrodistic influences and banned the Bacchanalia; (b) was suspi¬ 
cious of Mysteries of Asiatic origin because they increasingly gravitated around an 
unhealthy mysticism; (c) tolerated exotic cults, among winch we often find the chthonic 
and the Mothers themes, as long as they did not exercise a harmful influence on the 
social, virile lifestyle. The destruction of the apocryphal books of Numa Pompilius 
and the ban of the “philosophers,” especially of the Pythagoreans, were motivated 
by reasons that were more than political and not contingent. Just like the Etruscan 
remnants, Pythagoreanism too (which in Greece arose as a Pelasgic reemergence), 
despite the presence of different elements, may be considered an offshoot of a puri¬ 
fied “Demetrian” civilization. It is significant that classical authors believed that a 
close relationship existed between Pythagoras and the Etruscans and that the banned 
commentaries of Numa Pompilius’s books tended to sanction this relationship and 
open the doors (behind the mask of an alleged traditional spirit) to the antithetical 
and anti-Roman Pelasgic-Etruscan element. 

Othei historical events that from a metaphysical view of civilization have the 
meaning of symbols were the fall of the Isis-like kingdoms of Cleopatra and of Jerusa¬ 
lem, which marked the turning points in the inner Western life, and took place through 
the dynamics of the archetypal antitheses themselves reflected in the civil war. In 
Pompeius, Brutus, Cassius, and Anthony we may find the Southern theme in the 
tenacious but thwarted attempt to slow down and to overcome the new reality. While 
Cleopatra was the symbol of an Aphrodistic civilization under whose spell Anthony 
fell victim, 4 - 1 Caesar embodied the Aryan-Western type of the conqueror. With the 
woids: The gens Julia can claim both the sanctity of kings, who reign supreme 
among mortals, and the reverence due to gods, who hold even kings in their power,” 44 
he foretold the leemeigence in Rome of the highest view of the imperium. In reality, 
with Augustus who in the eyes of the Romans embodied the numen and the 
iietemitus of the son of Apollo the Sun—the unity of the two powers was reestab¬ 
lished following a reformation that meant to restore the principles of the ancient 
Roman religion against the invasion of the exotic cults and superstitions. Augustus 
represented a state that justified itself with the solar-Olympian idea and that natu¬ 
rally tended to implement the ideal of universality. The idea of Rome eventually 
affirmed itself beyond all ethnic and religious particularisms. Once the imperial cult 
was defined, it respected and welcomed into some sort of “religious feudalism” die 
various gods that corresponded to the traditions of the different peoples that were 
incorporated in the Roman ecumene; above any particular and national religion it 

43. It is interesting that Cleopatra assumed the name "Isis” and Anthony, “Dionysus," thus reproducing two 
complementary types of a civilization of "Aphrodistic” type. See Dio Cassius, Roman History. 10.5. 

44. Suetonius, Life of the Twelve Caesars (Julius Caesar, 6), 


was given witness to by a superior tides, which was connected with the supernatural 
principle embodied by the emperor, or by the “genius” of the emperor, and symbol¬ 
ized by the Victory as a mystical entity and to which the Senate swore faithfulness. 

At the time of Augustus, the asceticism of action characterized by an element of 
destiny had created a sufficiently vast body so that Roman universalism could also 
have a tangible expression and bestow its chrism on a heterogeneous group of popu¬ 
lations and races. Rome appeared as the “ genitrix of men and of gods”; as a city “in 
whose temples one is not far from heaven,” and which had made of different people 
one nation (fecistipatriam diversisgentibus unam). 45 The pax augusta et profunda, 
as pax romana, seemed to stretch as far as the limits of the known world. It was as if 
Tradition were destined to rise again in the fonns proper to a “heroic cycle.” It looked 
as if the Iron Age had come to an end and the return of the primordial age of the 
Hyperborean Apollo had begun: 

Now the last age of Cumae’s prophecy has come. The great succession 
of centuries is born anew. Now too returns the Virgin; Saturn’s rule 
returns. Now a new generation descends from heaven’s height. O chaste 
Lucina, look with blessing on the newborn boy whose birth will end the 
iron race at last and raise a golden through the world: now your [brother] 

Apollo reigns. ... He will receive the divine life and see the gods min¬ 
gling with heroes, and himself be seen one of them . 46 

This feeling was so strong that later on it affirmed itself and turned Rome into a 
superhistorical symbol; even Christians said that while Rome was safe and whole¬ 
some the dreadful convulsions of the last age were not to be feared, but that when 
Rome fell, humanity would find itself close to the end. 47 


45. Rutilius Namatianus, De red. suo, 1.49, 50, 62-65. 

46. Virgil, Eclogues, 4.5-10; 15-18. Among these prophetic expressions of Virgil we find mention of the 
serpent’s death (5.24); of a group of heroes who will renew the symbolic feat of Argon; and of Achilles 
who will wage a new symbolic war of the Achaeans against Troy. 

47. Expressions of Lactantius, The Divine Institutes, 7.25.6; Tertullian, Ad scupuJam, 2. 


276 


277 



Jyncopf Of THE lilfSTERfl TRADITIOn 


31 


Syncope of the Western Tradition 


Early Christianity 

he advent of Christianity marked the beginning of an unprecedented decline. In 
the previous pages I have emphasized the central force in Rome and its unfold¬ 
ing through a complex development; in the course of this development, heteroge¬ 
neous influences acted only fragmentarily vis-a-vis the supernatural element that 
gave to Rome its specific physiognomy. 

The Rome that emancipated itself from its aboriginal Atlantic and Etruscan- 
Pelasgian roots; destroyed in rapid succession the great centers of the more recent 
Southern civilization; despised Greek philosophers and banned the Pythagorean sect; 
and outlawed the Bacchanalia, thus reacting against the avant-garde of the 
Alexandrian deities (persecutions of 59, 58, 53, 50, and 40 b.c.)— that same Rome, 
that is, the sacral, patrician, and virile Rome inspired by the notions of ms, fas, and 
mos, increasingly fell under the spell of the onslaught of the Asiatic cults that rapidly 
infiltrated the structures of the empire and altered its physiognomy. Rome witnessed 
the return of the symbols of the Mother and of die most spurious forms of the various 
mystical and pantheistic cults of Southern deities, which were a tar cry from the 
Demetrian clarity of the origins and were associated with the corruption of the cus¬ 
toms and of the innermost Roman virtus more than with the corruption of the institu¬ 
tions. This was a process of disintegration that eventually affected the imperial idea 
itself. The sacred content of the imperial idea was preserved, but only as a mere 
symbol; it was carried by a turbid and chaotic current as a chrism that rarely corre¬ 
sponded to the dignity of those who were marked by it. Historically and politically 
even the representatives of the empire acted in a way that ran counter to that which 
would have required its defense and its reaffirmation as a solid and organic social 
order. Instead of reacting, selecting, and rallying the surviving elements of the “Ro- 
man race ’ around the heart of the state in order to contain adequately the new forces 


flowing into the empire, the Caesars began to practice an absolutist centralization 
and a leveling. Once the senate lost its influence the distinction between Roman 
citizens, Latin citizens, and the mass of other subjects was abolished and Roman 
citizenship was extended to everybody. The Caesars thought that a despotism based 
on military dictatorship and on a soulless bureaucratic and administrative structure 
could successfully hold together the Roman ecumene, which had truly been reduced 
to a cosmopolitan and disarticulated mass. Nobody was able to do anything decisive 
to stem the general process of decadence, not even people who exhibited traits of 
greatness and ancient Roman dignity, who embodied some features typical of a si¬ 
dereal nature and the quality of a “stone,” who had the sense of what true wisdom 
was, and who at times even received an initiatory consecration (like the emperor 
Julian). 

The imperial age exhibits, in the course of its development, this contradictory 
double nature: on the one hand, the theology, metaphysics, and liturgy of regality 
became increasingly defined; on the other hand, there were plenty of references to a 
new Golden Age. Every Caesar was acclaimed with the formula expectate veni; his 
apparition resembled a mystical event (adventus augusti) and it was accompanied 
by natural wonders, just like his decline was marked by bad omens. He was the 
redditor lutis aetenme (Constantius Chlorus); he was again the pontifex magnus and 
the one who received from the Olympian god the universal dominion symbolized by 
a sphere. The crown resembling the rays of the sun and the scepter of the king of 
heaven were a Caesar’s royal insignia. His laws were regarded as sacred or divine. 
Even in the senate, the ceremony that consecrated him had a liturgical character. His 
image was worshiped in the temples of the various provinces, portrayed on various 
military standards, and regarded as the supreme reference point of the fides and of 
the cult of his soldiers and as the symbol of the unity of the empire. 

But this was just a ray of light shining in the middle of a dark night of forces, 
passions, murders, cruelties, and betrayals that assumed epidemic proportions. With 
the passing of time this background became increasingly tragic, bloody, and frag¬ 
mentary, despite the sporadic appearance of harsh leaders who were able to com¬ 
mand obedience and respect in a world that was weak and falling apart. Eventually, 
a point was reached when the imperial function existed only nominally; Rome re¬ 
mained faithful to it almost desperately, in a world lacerated by dreadful upheavals. 
And yet, the throne was vacant, so to speak. The subversive influence of Christianity 
added its weight to all of this. 

If, on the one hand, we should not ignore the complexity and the heterogeneity 
of the elements that were found in primitive Christianity, on the other hand, we 
should not minimize the existing antithesis between the dominating forces and t ht 



278 


279 




Genesis reid Frce of the AIodem World 


SyncopE of the IUestem tonon 


pathos found in these elements and the original Roman spirit. At this point I do not 
purport to focus on the traditional elements found in this or that historical civilization; 
I rather intend to assess in what function and according to what spirit the historical 
currents have acted as a whole. Thus the presence of some traditional elements 
within Christianity, and more specifically within Catholicism, should not prevent us 
from recognizing the subversive character of these two currents. 

We already know what kind of equivocal spirituality is associated with Judaism, 
from which Christianity grew, and with the Asiatic cults of decadence that facilitated 
the expansion of the new faith beyond its birthplace. 

The immediate antecedent of Christianity was not traditional Judaism, but rather 
prophetism and analogous currents in which the notions of sin and of expiation pre¬ 
vailed; in which a desperate form of spirituality emerged; and in which the type of 
the warrior Messiah as an emanation of the “Lord of Hosts” was replaced with the 
type of the Messiah as “Son of Man” predestined to be the sacrificial victim, the 
persecuted one, the hope of the afflicted and the rejected, as well as the object of a 
confused and ecstatic cult. It is a well-known fact that the mystical figure of Jesus 
Christ originally derived his power and inspiration from an environment impreg¬ 
nated with this messianic pathos, the size of which grew with time as a result of 
prophetic preaching and various apocalyptic expectations. By regarding Jesus as 
Savior and by breaking away from the “Law,” that is, from Jewish orthodoxy, primi¬ 
tive Christianity took up several themes typical of the Semitic soul at large. These 
themes were those proper to an innerly divided human type and constituted fertile 
ground for the growth of an antitraditional virus, especially vis-h-vis a tradition like 
the Roman one. Through Paul’s theology these elements were universalized and 
activated without a direct relationship to their Jewish origins. 

As far as Orphism is concerned, it facilitated the acceptance of Christianity in 
several areas of the ancient world, not so much as an initiatory doctrine of the Mys¬ 
teries, but as its profanation paralleling the onslaught of the cults of Mediterranean 
decadence. These cults were characterized by the idea of “salvation” in a merely 
religious sense and by the ideal of a religion open to everyone and therefore alien to 
any notion of race, tradition, and caste; in other words, this ideal welcomed all those 
who had no race, tradition, or caste. A confused need started to grow among these 
masses, in concert with the parallel action of the universalist cults of Eastern origins, 
until the figure of the founder of Christianity became the precipitating catalyst and 
the crystallization of what had been saturating the spiritual “atmosphere,” When this 
happened, it was no longer a matter of a state of mind or a widespread influence, but 
of a well-defined force opposing the world of tradition. 

From a doctrinal point of view, Christianity appears as a desperate version of 


Dionysism, Modeling itself after a broken human type, it appealed to the irrational 
part of being and instead of the paths of heroic, sapiential, and initiatory spiritual 
growth posited faith as its fundamental instrument, the elan of a restless and per¬ 
turbed soul that is attracted to the supernatural in a confused way. Through its sug¬ 
gestions concerning the imminent advent of the Kingdom of God and its vivid 
portrayals of either eternal salvation or eternal damnation, primitive Christianity 
exasperated the crisis of such a human type and strengthened the force of faith, 
thus opening a problematic path of liberation through the symbol of salvation and 
redemption found in the crucified Christ. If in the symbolism of Christ there are 
traces of a mysteric pattern (through new references to Orphism and to analogous 
currents), nevertheless the proprium or typical feature of the new religion was the 
employment of such a pattern on a plane that was no longer based on initiation, but 
rather on feelings and on a confused mysticism; therefore it can rightly be said that 
with Christianity, God became a human being. In Christianity we no longer find the 
pure religion of the Law, as in traditional Judaism, nor a true initiatory Mystery, but 
rather an intermediate form, a surrogate of the latter in a formulation proper to the 
abovementioned broken human type; this type felt relieved from his abjection, 
redeemed through the feeling of “grace,” animated by a new hope, justified and 
rescued from the world, the flesh, and from death. 1 All of this represented something 
fundamentally alien to the Roman and classical spirit, better yet, to the Indo- 
European spirit as a whole. Historically, this signified the predominance of pathos 
over ethos and of that equivocal, deficient soteriology that had always been opposed 
by the noble demeanor of the sacred Roman patriciate, by the strict style of the 
jurists, the leaders, and the pagan sages. God was no longer conceived of as the 
symbol of an essence not liable to passion and change, which establishes an un¬ 
bridgeable distance between itself and all that is merely human; nor was he the God 
of the patricians who is invoked in an erect position, who is carried in front of the 
legions and who becomes embodied in the winner. The God who came to be wor¬ 
shiped was a figure who in his “passion” took up and affirmed in an exclusivist 
fashion (“I am the way, the truth, and the life. No one can come to the Father except 

L. Thus, in comparison with historical Judaism, primitive Christianity may be credited with a mystical char¬ 
acter along the same lines of prophetism, but not with an initiatory character, contrary to what F. Schuon 
claimed (The Transcendent Unity of Religions [Paris, 1937]) on the basis of sporadic elements found 
mostly in Eastern Orthodoxy. We should never forget though that if Christianity developed front the an¬ 
cient Jewish tradition, orthodox Judaism developed in an independent fashion through the Talmud and the 
Kabbalah, which represents an initiatory tradition that was always missing in Christianity. This is how, 
later on, true esoterism developed in the West, that is, outside Christianity and with the help of non- 
Christian currents such as the Jewish Kabbalah, Hermeticism, or movements of a remote Nordic origin. 


280 


281 



Genesis and Face of the FOodern World 


Syncope of the Western Tradition 


through me.” John 14:6-7) the Pelasgic-Dionysian motif of the sacrificed gods and 
the gods who die and rise again in the shadow of the Great Mothers. 2 Even the myth 
of the virginal birth reflects an analogous influence, since it reminds us of the god¬ 
desses who generate without a mate (like Hesiod’s Gaea); in this regard the relevant 
role that the cult of the “Mother of God,” or the “Divine Virgin” was destined to play 
in the development of Christianity is significant. In Catholicism Mary, the “Mother 
of God,” is the queen of angels and of all the saints; she is also thought of as the 
adoptive mother of mankind, as the “Queen of the world,” and as the “bestower of 
all favors.” These expressions, which are exaggerated in comparison to the effective 
role played by Mary in the myth of the Synoptic Gospels, echo the attributes of the 
sovereign divine Mothers of the pre-Indo-European Southern Hemisphere. 3 Although 
Christianity is essentially a religion of the Christ, more so than of the Father, its 
representations of both the infant Jesus and the body of the crucified Christ in the 
arms of the deified Mother show definite similarities with the representations of the 
eastern Mediterranean cults, 4 thereby giving new emphasis to the antithesis that 
exists between itself and the ideal of the purely Olympian deities who are exempt 
from passions and free of the telluric, maternal element. The symbol that the Church 
herself eventually adopted was that of the Mother (Mother Church). The epitome of 
true religiosity became that of the imploring and prayerful soul, that is aware of its 
unworthiness, sinfulness, and powerlessness before the Crucified One. 5 The hatred 
early Christianity felt toward any form of virile spirituality, and its stigmatization as 
folly and sin of pride anything that may promote an active overcoming of the human 
condition express in a clear fashion its lack of understanding of the “heroic” symbol. 
The potential that the new faith was able to generate among those who felt the live 
mysteiy of the Christ, or of the Savior, and who drew from it the inner strength to 

2. L. Rougier, Celse (Paris, 1925). 

3. It is also significant that according to many Catholic theologians, any sign of predestination and election is 
dubious; the only certain sign is that consisting in devotion to the Virgin. Accordingly, the “true servant of 
Mary will inherit eternal life. Concerning this attitude, see J. Berthier, Sonimario di (cologia dogmatica 
e morale (Turin 1933), 1791-92, 

4. Saint Jerome (EpistuJa ad Pnulinum, 49) noticed that Bethlehem, significantly, “was once under the shad¬ 
ows of the woods sacred toTammuz-Adonis; in this cave, in which the infant Jesus cried, Venus’s beloved 
was once mourned." Concerning the feminine element in Christianity, J. de Maistre wrote: “We can see 
how salvation (salut) began with a woman who had been announced from the origins. In all of the evan¬ 
gelical narratives, women have a very important role to play. Also, in all of the famous triumphs of 
Christianity [as was the case in the Dionysian religion] over individuals and nations, there was always a 
woman in the background.” 

5. In pre-Christian Rome the libri sibillini, which introduced the cult of the Great Goddess, also introduced 
the supplicatio, the ritual abasement before the divine statue, whose knees were hugged and whose hands 
and feet were kissed. 


pursue martyrdom frantically, does not prevent the advent of Christianity from rep¬ 
resenting a fall; its advent characterized a special form of that spiritual emasculation 
typical of the cycles of a lunar and priestly type. 

Even in Christian morality, the role played by Southern and non-Aryan influ¬ 
ences is rather visible. It does not really make much of a difference that it was in the 
name of a god instead of a goddess that equality among human beings was spiritu¬ 
ally proclaimed and that love was adopted as the supreme principle. This belief in 
human equality essentially belongs to a general worldview, a version of which is 
that “natural law” that crept into the Roman law during decadent times; it exercised 
an antithetical function to the heroic ideal of personality and to the value bestowed 
on anything that a being, by becoming differentiated, by giving itself a form, is able 
to claim for itself within a hierarchical social order. And so it happened that Christian 
egalitarianism, based on the principles of brotherhood, love, and community, be¬ 
came the mystical and religious foundation of a social ideal radically opposed to the 
pure Roman idea. Instead of universality, which is authentic only in its function as a 
hierarchical peak that does not abolish but presupposes and sanctions the differ¬ 
ences among human beings, what arose was the ideal of collectivity reaffinned in 
the symbol of the mystical body of Christ; this latter ideal contained in embryonic 
form a further regressive and involutive influence that Catholicism itself, despite its 
Romanization, was neither able nor entirely willing to overcome. 

Some people attempt to see a value in Christianity as a doctrine because of its 
idea of the supernatural and the dualism that it upheld. Here, however, we find a typical 
case of a different action that the same principle can exercise according to the func¬ 
tion under which it is assumed. Christian dualism essentially derives from the dua 
ism proper to the Semitic spirit; it acted in a totally opposite way from the spirit ac¬ 
cording to which the doctrine of the two natures constituted the basis of any achieve¬ 
ment of traditional humanity. In early Christianity the rigid opposition of the natural 
and supernatural orders may have had a pragmatic justification motivated by a par¬ 
ticular historical and existential situation of a given human type. Such dualism differs 
from the traditional dualism, however, in that it is not subordinated to a higher prin¬ 
ciple or to a higher truth, and that it claims for itself an absolute and ontological chai- 
acter rather than a relative and functional one. The two orders, the natural and the 
supernatural, as well as the distance between them, were hypostatized and thus any 
real and active contact was prevented from taking place. Thus, in regard to man (here 
too because of a parallel influence of a Jewish theme) what emerged were: (a) the 
notion of the “creature” separated by an essential distance from God as its Creator 
and as a personal, distinct being; and (b) the exasperation ot this distance through the 
revival and the accentuation of the idea, of Jewish origins as well, of “original sin. 


282 


283 



Geaem mid Pace of tae IDoderii LUorld 


S'jncoPE oe iae ULIesterfi TRADITIOn 


More particularly, this dualism generated the understanding of all manifesta¬ 
tions of spiritual influence in the passive terms of “grace,” “election,” and “salva¬ 
tion,” as well as the disavowal (at times accompanied by real animosity) of all “he¬ 
roic” human possibilities; the counterpart of this disavowal consisted in humility, 
fear of God, mortification of the flesh, and prayer. Jesus' saying in Matthew (11:12) 
concerning the violence suffered by the kingdom of Heaven and the revival of the 
Davidic saying: “You are gods” (John 10:34), belong to elements that exercised 
virtually no influence on the main pathos of early Christianity. But in Christianity in 
general it is evident that what has been universalized, rendered exclusive, and ex¬ 
alted are the way, the truth, and the attitude that pertain only to an inferior human 
type or to those lower strata of a society for whom the exoteric forms of Tradition 
have been devised; this was precisely one of the characteristic signs of the climate of 
the Dark Age, or Kali Yuga. 

What has been said concerns the relationship of man with the divine. The sec¬ 
ond consequence of Christian dualism was the deconsecration of nature. Christian 
“supernaturalism” caused the natural myths of antiquity to be misunderstood once and 
for all. Nature ceased to be something living; that magical and symbolical perception 
of nature that formed the basis of priestly sciences was rejected and branded as “pa¬ 
gan.” Following the triumph of Christianity, these sciences underwent a rapid process 
of degeneration, with the exception of a weakened residue represented by the later 
Catholic tradition of the rites. Thus, nature came to be perceived as something alien 
and even diabolical. Again, this constituted the basis for the development of an as¬ 
ceticism of a monastic and mortifying type, hostile to the world and to life (Christian 
asceticism), and radically antithetical to the classical and Roman sensibility. 

The third consequence concerns the political domain. The principles: “My king¬ 
dom is not of this world” (John 18:36) and “Render therefore unto Caesar the things 
which are Caesar’s and unto God the things that are God's” (Matt. 22:21), repre¬ 
sented a direct attack on the concept ot traditional sovereignty and of that unity of 
the two powers that had formally been reestablished in imperial Rome, According to 
Gelasius I, after Christ, no man can simultaneously be king and priest; the unity of 
sacerdotium and regnum , when it is vindicated by a king, is a diabolical deception 
and a counterfeit of the true priestly regality that belongs to Christ alone. It was 
precisely at this point that the contrast between Christian and Roman ideas escalated 
into an open conflict. When Christianity developed the Roman pantheon was so 
inclusive that even the cult of the Christian Savior could have found its proper place 
within it, among other cults, as a particular cult derived from a schism in Judaism. As 
I have previously suggested, it was typical of the imperial universalism to exercise a 
higher unifying and organizing function over and above any particular cult, which it 


did not need to deny or to oppose. What was required though, was an act demonstrat¬ 
ing a superordained fides in reference to the principle “from above” embodied in the 
representative of the empire, namely, in the “Augustus.” The Christians refused to 
perform this very act, consisting of a ritual and sacrificial offering made before the 
imperial symbol, since they claimed that it was incompatible with their faith; this 
was the only reason why there was such an epidemic of martyrs, which may have 
appeared as pure folly in the eyes of the Roman magistrates. 

In this way, the new belief imposed itself. Over and against a particular univer¬ 
salism, a new, opposite universalism based on a metaphysical dualism affirmed it¬ 
self. The traditional hierarchical view according to which loyalty enjoyed a super¬ 
natural sanction and a religious value, since every power descended from above, 
was undermined at its very foundation. In this sinful world there can only be room for 
a civitas diaboli; the civitas dei, or the divine state, was thought to belong to a sepa¬ 
rate plane and to consist in the unity of those who are drawn to the otherworld by a 
confused longing and who, as Christians, acknowledge only Christ as their leader as 
they await the Last Day. Wherever this idea did not result in a vims that proved to be 
a defeatist and subversive one, and wherever Caesar was still given “the things 
which are Caesar’s,” the fides remained deconsecrated and secularized; it merely 
had the value of a contingent obedience to a power that was merely temporal. The 
Pauline saying, “all authority comes from God” was destined to remain ineffectual 
and meaningless. 

And thus, although Christianity upheld the spiritual and supernatural principle, 
historically speaking this principle was destined to act in a dissociative and even 
destructive fashion; it did not represent something capable of galvanizing whatever 
in the Roman world had become materialized and fragmented, but rather repre¬ 
sented something heterogeneous, a different current drawn to what in Rome was no 
longer Roman and to forces that the Northern Light had successfully kept under 
control for the duration of an entire cycle. It helped to rescind the last contacts and to 
accelerate the end of a great tradition. It is not surprising that Rutilius Namatianus 
put Christians and Jews on the same level, insofar as both groups were hostile to 
Rome's authority; he also blamed the former for spreading a fatal disease (excisae 
pestis contagia) outside the boundaries of Judea, which was under the legions yoke, 
and the latter for spreading a poison that altered both the race and the spirit (time 
mutabantur corpora, nunc animi). 

When considering the enigmatic witnesses offered by ancient symbols, one cannot 
help noticing the role the motif of the ass played in the myth of Jesus. Not only was 
the ass present in the Nativity scene, but it was on an ass that the Virgin and the 
Divine Child escaped to Egypt; most of all, it was on an ass that Jesus rode during his 


284 


285 



Gehesie id Face of the Modem World 

triumphal entrance into Jerusalem. The ass was a traditional symbol of an infernal 
dissolutive “force.” In Egypt it was the animal sacred to Set, who embodied this 
force, had an antisolar character, and was associated with the “children of the pow¬ 
erless rebellion.” In India the ass was the mount of Mudevi, who represented the 
infernal aspect of the feminine deity. Also, in Greece the ass was the symbolic ani¬ 
mal that in Lethe’s plain continuously ate Ocnus’s handiwork, and that had a rela¬ 
tionship with the chthonic and infernal goddess Hecate. 6 

This is how this symbol could represent the secret sign of a force that was asso¬ 
ciated with primitive Christianity and to which it partially owed its success; it was the 
force that emerged and assumed an active part wherever what corresponded to the 
“cosmos” principle within a traditional structure vacillated and disintegrated. In re¬ 
ality, the advent of Christianity would not have been possible if the vital possibilities 
of the Roman heroic cycle had not been exhausted; if the “Roman race” had not 
been broken in its spirit and in its representatives (a proof of this was the failure of 
the attempted restoration promoted by Emperor Julian); if the ancient traditions had 
not been dimmed; and if, in the context of an ethnic chaos and a cosmopolitan disin¬ 
tegration, the imperial symbol had not been contaminated and reduced to merely 
surviving in a world of ruins. 


6. In the Rg Veda the ass is often referred to as riisnbha, a word that denotes turmoil, noise, and even 
inebriation. In the myth, Apollo turned King Midas’s ears into ass’s cars, since the latter had preferred 
Pan’s music to his own—in other words, for preferring the Dionysian, pantheistic cult to the Hyperborean 
cult. The slaughter of asses was, among the Hyperboreans, the sacrifice that Apollo preferred, See Pindar, 
Pythian Odes, 10.33-56. Typhon-Set (who corresponds to Python, Apollo’s nemesis), after being defeated 
by Horns, runs into the desert riding an ass (Plutarch, De Iside et Osiride, 29-32); Apep, the serpent that 
represents the principle of darkness, is often portrayed in the company of an ass or riding an ass. Dionysus 
too was believed to have been carried to Thebes by an ass, an animal that was always associated with 
him. Some of these elements must have been preserved underground, since they later reemerged in some 
medieval festivals in which the Virgin and Child, led by Joseph, were carried in a procession, in the course 
of which the highest honors were paid to the ass. 


286 


32 



The Revival of the Empire and the 
Ghibelline Middle Ages 


T he tradition that shaped the Roman world manifested its power vis-a-vis Chris¬ 
tianity in the fact that, although the new faith was successful in overthrowing 
the ancient civilization, it nevertheless was not able to conquer the Western world as 
pure Christianity; wherever it achieved some greatness it did so only thanks to Ro¬ 
man and classical pre-Christian elements borrowed from the previous tradition, and 
not because of the Christian element in its original form. 

For all practical purposes, Christianity “converted” Western man only superfi¬ 
cially; it constituted his “faith” in the most abstract sense while his real life continued 
to obey the more or less material forms of the opposite tradition of action, and latei 
on, during the Middle Ages, an ethos that was essentially shaped by the Northem- 
Aryan spirit. In theory, the Western world accepted Christianity but for all practical 
purposes it remained pagan; the fact that Europe was able to incorporate so many 
motifs that were connected with the Jewish and Levantine view of life has always 
been a source of surprise among historians. Thus, the outcome was some sort of 
hybridism. Even in its attenuated and Romanized Catholic version, the Christian 
faith represented an obstacle that deprived Western man of the possibility of inte¬ 
grating his authentic and irrepressible way of being through a concept and in a rela¬ 
tionship with the Sacred that was most congenial to him. In turn, this way of being 
prevented Christianity from definitely shaping the West into a tradition of the oppo¬ 
site kind, that is, into a priestly and religious one conformed to the ideals of the 
ecclesia of the origins, the evangelical pathos, and the symbol of the mystical body 
of Christ. Further on, I will closely analyze the effects of this double antithesis on the 
course of Western history; strictly speaking, this antithesis represented an important 
factor in the processes leading to the modern world. 

In a particular cycle, however, the Christian idea (in those concepts in which the 


287 



Genesis nno Face of the FOoderit HJorld 


The Revival of the Empire find the Ghibellme ITIiddle Ages 


supernatural was emphasized) seemed to have become absorbed by the Roman idea 
in forms that again elevated the imperial idea to new heights, even though the tradi¬ 
tion of this idea, found in the center constituted by the “eternal” city, had by then 
decayed. Such was the Byzantine cycle or the cycle of the Eastern Roman Empire. 
What occurred in the east, however, corresponded to what had previously occurred 
in the low empire. The Byzantine imperial idea displayed a high degree of tradi¬ 
tional spirit, at least theoretically. For instance, it upheld the ideal of the sacred ruler 
(pacntevg avroKpatop) whose authority came from above and whose law, reflect¬ 
ing the divine law, had a universal value; also the clergy was subjected to him be¬ 
cause the emperor was in charge of both temporal and spiritual affairs. Likewise, in 
the Eastern Empire the idea of the popaiot (the “Romans”) took hold and came to 
represent the unity of those who were elevated by the chrism inherent in the partici¬ 
pation in the Roman-Christian ecumene to a dignity higher than any other people 
ever achieved. The empire once again was sacnim and its pax had a supernatural 
meaning. And yet, even more so than during the Roman decadence, all tins remained 
a symbol earned by chaotic and murky forces, since the ethnic substance was char¬ 
acterized, much more so than in the. previous imperial Roman cycle, by demon wor¬ 
ship, anarchy, and the principle of undying restlessness typical of the decadent and 
crepuscular Hellenic-Eastern world. Here too, the Byzantine emperors incorrectly 
assumed that despotism and a bureaucratic, centralized administrative structure could 
achieve that which only proceeds from the spiritual authority of worthy representa¬ 
tives who surround themselves with people who had the quality of “Romans,” not 
just nominally, but imprinted in their inner character. Therefore the forces of dissolu¬ 
tion were destined to prevail, even though Byzantium lasted as a political reality for 
about a millennium. What remained of the Byzantine Roman-Christian idea were 
mere echoes, partially absorbed in a very modified form by Slavic peoples and par¬ 
tially brought together again in that revival of tradition constituted by tire Ghibelline 
Middle Ages. 

In order to follow the development of forces that shaped the Western world, it is 
necessary to briefly consider Catholicism. Catholicism developed through (a) the 
rectification of various extremist features of primitive Christianity; (b) the organiza¬ 
tion of a ritual, dogmatic, and symbolic corpus beyond the mere mystical, soteriological 
element; and (c) the absorption and adaptation of doctrinal and organizational ele- 
nents that were borrowed from the Roman world and from classical civilization in 
general. This is how Catholicism at times displayed “traditional” features, which 
levertheless should not deceive us: that which in Catholicism has a truly traditional 
character is not typically Christian and that which in Catholicism is specifically Chris¬ 
tian can hardly be considered traditional. Historically, despite ail the efforts that 


were made to reconcile heterogeneous and contradictory elements, 1 and despite the 
work of absorption and adaptation on a large scale, Catholicism always betrays the 
spirit of lunar, priestly civilizations and thus it continues, in yet another form, the 
antagonistic action of the Southern influences, to which it offered a real organization 
through the Church and her hierarchy. 

This becomes evident when we examine the development of the principle of 
authority that was claimed by the Church. During the early centuries of the Chris¬ 
tianized empire and during the Byzantine period, the Church still appeared to be 
subordinated to imperial authority; at Church councils the bishops left the last word 
to the ruler not only in disciplinary but also in doctrinal matters. Gradually, a shift 
occurred to the belief in the equality of the two powers of Church and empire; both 
institutions came to be regarded as enjoying a supernatural authority and a divine 
origin. With the passage of time we find in the Carolingian ideal the principle ac¬ 
cording to which the king is supposed to rule over both clergy and the people on the 
one hand, while on the other hand the idea was developed according to which the 
royal function was compared to that of the body and the priestly function to that of 
the soul; 2 thereby the idea of the equality of the two powers was implicitly aban¬ 
doned, thus preparing the way for the real inversion of relations. 

By analogy, if in every rational being the soul is the principle that decides what 
the body will do, how could one think that those who admitted to having authority 
only in matters of social and political concern should not be subordinated to the 
Church, to whom they willingly recognized the exclusive right over and direction of 
souls? Thus, the Church eventually disputed and regarded as tantamount to heresy 

1. The origin of the majority of the difficulties and of the upon tie encountered in Catholic philosophy and 
theology (especially in Scholasticism and in Thomism) is essentially due to the spiritual incompatibility 
between the elements that were derived from Platonism and Aristotclianism on the one hand, and those 
that were specifically Christian and Jewish on the oilier. See L. Rougicr, La Scolnstiquc et le tomisme 
(Paris, 1930). 

2, By divine decree the emperor must ensure that the Church fulfills her function and mission; thus, not only 
was he crowned with the same symbols proper to the priestly consecration, but he also had the authority 
and the right to demote and to banish unworthy clergy; the monarch was truly regarded as the king-priest 
according to the order of Melchizedek, while the bishop of Rome was merely the vicar of Christ. F. de 
Coulanges {Les Transformations dc Li roynute pendant I’Opaque carolinglenne, [Paris, 1892]) rightly re¬ 
marked that although Pepin, Charlemagne, and Louis the Pious swore to “defend” the Church, we should 
not be deceived by the meaning of this expression since in those days it had a different meaning than it 
does today. To defend the Church meant, in the parlance and in the mind-set of that period, to protect and 
exercise authority over her at the same time, What was called “defense” was really a contract that implied 
the state of dependence of the protected one, who was subjected to all the obligations the language of 
those times conveyed in the word tides, including swearing an oath of allegiance to the ruler. Charlemagne, 
when he took upon himself to defend the Church, also took on the authority and the responsibility of 
fortifying her in the “true faith.” 


288 


289 



Genesis non Face oe the FTIodcrii World 


The Revival of the Tiiipire add the Ghibelim (TIiddle Ages 


and a prevarication dictated by pride that doctrine of the divine nature and origin of 
regality; it also came to regard the ruler as a mere layman equal to all other men 
before God and his Church, and a mere official invested by mortal beings with the 
power to rule over others in accordance with natural law. According to the Church, 
the ruler should receive from the ecclesiastical hierarchy the spiritual element that 
prevents his government from becoming the civitas diaboli. Boniface VIII, who did 
not hesitate to ascend to the throne of Constantine with a sword, crown, and scepter 
and to declare: “I am Caesar, I am the Emperor,” embodies the logical conclusion of 
a theocratic, Southern upheaval in which the priest was entrusted with both evan¬ 
gelical swords (the spiritual and the temporal); the imperium itself came to be re¬ 
garded as a beneficium conferred by the pope to somebody, who in return owed to 
the Church the same vassalage and obedience a feudal vassal owes the person who 
has invested him. However, since the spirituality that the head of the Roman Church 
incarnated remained in its essence that of the “servants of God,” we can say that far 
from representing the restoration of the primordial and solar unity of the two powers, 
Guelphism merely testifies to how Rome had lost its ancient tradition and how it 
came to represent the opposite principle and the triumph of the Southern 
Weltanschauung in Europe. In the confusion that was beginning to affect even the 
symbols, the Church, who on the one hand claimed for herself the symbol of the sun 
vis-a-vis the empire (to which she attributed the symbol of the moon), on the other 
hand employed the symbol of the Mother to refer to herself and considered the 
emperor as one of her “children.” Thus, the Guelph ideal of political supremacy 
marked the return to the ancient gynaecocratic vision in which the authority, superi¬ 
ority, and privilege of spiritual primacy was accorded to the maternal principle over 
the male principle, which was then associated with the temporal and ephemeral 
reality. 

Thus, a change occurred. The Roman idea was revived by races of a direct 
Northern origin, which various migrations had pushed into the area of Roman civili¬ 
zation. The Germanic element was destined to defend the imperial idea against the 
Church and to restore to new life the formative vis of the ancient Roman world. This 
is how the Holy Roman Empire and the feudal civilization arose, both of which 
represented the two last great traditional manifestations the West ever knew. 

As far as the Germans were concerned, since the times of Tacitus they ap¬ 
peared to be very similar to the Achaean, paleo-Iranian, paleo-Roman and North- 
em-Aryan stocks that had been preserved, in many aspects (including the racial 
one), in a state of “prehistoric” purity. The Germanic populations—-just like the Goths, 
the Longobards, the Burgundians, and the Franks—were looked down upon as bar- 
baiians by that decadent civilization that had been reduced to a juridical adminis¬ 


trative structure and that had degenerated into “Aphrodistic” forms of hedonistic 
urban refinement, intellectualism, aestheticism, and cosmopolitan dissolution. And 
yet in the coarse and unsophisticated forms of their customs one could find the ex¬ 
pression of an existence characterized by the principles of honor, faithfulness, and 
pride. It was precisely this “barbaric” element that represented a vital force, the lack 
of which had been one of the main causes of Roman and Byzantine decadence. 

The fact that the ancient Germans were “young races” has prevented many 
scholars from seeing the full picture of earlier antiquity; these races were young only 
because of the youth typical of that which still maintains contact with the origins. 
These races descended from the last offshoots to leave the Arctic seat and that there¬ 
fore had not suffered the miscegenation and the alterations experienced by similar 
populations that had abandoned the Arctic seat much earlier, as is the case with the 
paleo-Indo-European stocks that had settled in the prehistoric Mediterranean. 

The Nordic-Germanic people, besides their ethos, carried in their myths the 
traces of a tradition that derived immediately from the primordial tradition. The fact 
that during the period in which they appeared as decisive forces on the stage of 
European history these stocks lost the memory of their origins, and that the primor¬ 
dial tradition was present in those stocks only in the form of fragmentary, often al¬ 
tered, and unrefined residues, did not prevent them from carrying as a deep, inner 
legacy the possibilities and the acquired Weltanschauung from which “heroic” cycles 
derive. 

The myth of the Edda spoke about both the impending doom and the heroic will 
opposed to it. In the older parts of that myth there remained the memory of a deep 
freeze that arrested the twelve “streams” originating from the primordial and lumi¬ 
nous center of Muspelheim, located at the “far end of the earth”; this center corre¬ 
sponds to the Ariyana Vaego (the Iranian equivalent of the Hyperborean seat), to the 
radiant Northern Island of the Hindus, and to the other figurations of the seat of the 
Golden Age. 3 Moreover, the Edda mention a “Green Land”" 1 floating on the abyss 
and surrounded by the ocean; according to some traditions, this was the original 

3. Considering the fragmentary character and the several strata of the tradition of the Edda, it is not easy to 
orient oneself in it without possessing an adequate preparation in the matter. For instance, we often find in 
the Edda that the Muspelheim (world of fire) was no longer located in the North and therefore made to 
correspond to the Nordic seat, while the Niflheim and the frost-giants inhabiting it, were. Conversely, 
after Muspelheim was invaded by the forces of the South, it quickly turned into its opposite, thus acquiring 
a negative value; it became the seat of Surtr (a fire demon), who will overcome the gods and usher in the 
end of a cycle. Also, the sons of Muspell became the enemies of the Olympian gods and will cause the 
Bifrost bridge (uniting heaven and earth) to collapse once they ride over it. See Voluspa, 50, 51. 

4. In the names “Ireland” and “Greenland” (Grunes-L,and = “the green land ) we find the idea of green , 
allegedly, up to the time of Procopius Greenland retained a lush vegetation. 


290 


291 



Genesis id Pace of the Modem World 


The Revival of the Pitipire hiid the Ghibellihe Middle Ages 


location of the “Fall” and of dark and tragic times, since it was here that the warm 
current of the Muspelheim (in this order of traditional myths, the waters represent 
the force that gives life to people and to races) met the frigid current of Huergehmir. 
Just as in the Zend-Avesta the freezing and dark winter that depopulated Ariyana 
Vaego was conceived as the work of an evil god opposed to the luminous creation, 
likewise this Eddie myth may allude to the alteration that precipitated the new cycle; 
this is true especially if we consider that the myth mentions a generation of giants 
and elemental telluric beings, creatures that were defrosted by the warm current, 
and against whom the race of the Aesir is going to fight. 

In the Edda, the theme of ragna-rok or ragna-rokkr (the “destiny” or the “twi¬ 
light of the gods”) is the equivalent of the traditional teaching concerning the four- 
stage involutive process; it threatens the struggling world, which is already domi¬ 
nated by dualistic thinking. From an esoteric point of view this “twilight” affects 
the gods only metaphorically; it also signifies the “dimming” of the gods in human 
consciousness because mankind loses the gods, that is, the possibility of establish¬ 
ing a contact with them. Such a destiny may be avoided, however, by preserving 
the purity of the deposit of that primordial and symbolic element—gold—with which 
the “palace of the heroes,” the hall of Odin’s twelve thrones, was built in the 
mythical Asgard. This gold, which could act as a source of good health so long as 
it was not touched by an elemental or by a human being, eventually fell into the 
hands of Albericus, the king of the subterranean beings that in the later editing of 
the myth are called the Nibelungs. This clearly shows the echo of what in other 
traditions was the advent of the Bronze Age, the cycle of the Titanic-Promethean 
rebellion, which was probably connected with the magical involution in the infe¬ 
rior sense of previous cults. 5 

Over and against this stands the world of the Aesir, the Nordic-Germanic deities 
who embody the Uranian principle in its warrior aspect. The god Donnar-Thor was 
the slayer of Thym and Hymir, the “strongest of all,” the “irresistible,” the “Lord 
who rescues from terror,” whose fearful weapon, the double hammer Mjolmir, was 
both a variation of the symbolic, Hyperborean battle-axe and a sign of the thunder¬ 
bolt force proper to the Uranian gods of the Aryan cycle. The god Woden-Odin was 
he who granted victory and who had wisdom; he was the master of very powerful 
formulae that were not to be revealed to any woman, not even to the king’s daughter. 

5. Ii was probably in reference to (his that the Nibelungs and the giants were represented as the creators of 
magical objects and weapons (hat will change hands and be acquired by the Aesir and the heroes (e.g,, 
the hammer-thunderbolt of Thor; the golden ring and the magical helmet of Sigurd). A rather complex 
saga explains how these weapons and objects eventually turned into liabilities to the Aesir when they 
employed them in the reconstruction of the fortress of Asgard, which barred the way to the elementals 
(Gylfnginnig, 42). 


He was the eagle; he was tine host and the father 6 of the dead heroes who were 
selected by the Valkyries on the battlefields; it was he who bestowed on the noble 
ones that “spirit that lives on and which does not die when the body is dissolved into 
the earth”; 7 and he was the deity to whom the royal stocks attributed their origin. The 
god Tyr-Tiuz was another god of battles, and the god of the day, of the radiant solar 
sky, who was represented by the rune Y, which recalls the very ancient and Northern- 
Atlantic sign of the cosmic man with his hands raised. 

One of the motifs of the “heroic” cycles appears in the saga concerning the stock 
of the Wolsungen, which was generated from tine union of a god with a woman. Sigmund, 
who will one day extract the sword inserted in the divine tree, came from this stock. In 
this saga the hero Sigurd or Siegfried, after taking possession of the gold that had fallen 
into the hands of the Nibelungs, kills the dragon Fafnir, which is another form of the 
serpent Nidboog. This serpent, in the action of corroding the roots of the divine tree 
Yggdrasil (its collapse will mark the twilight of the race of the gods), personifies the 
dark power of decadence. Although Sigurd in the end is killed by treachery and the 
gold is returned to the waters, he nevertheless remains the heroic type endowed with 
the tamkappe (the symbolic power that can transfer a person from the bodily dimen¬ 
sion to the invisible), and predestined to possess the divine woman either in the form 
of a vanquished Amazonian queen (Brynhild, as the queen of the Northern Island) or 
in the form of a Valkyrie, a warrior virgin who went from an earthly to a divine seat. 

The oldest Nordic stocks regarded Gardarike, a land located in the Far North, ar 
their original homeland. This seat, even when it was identified with a Scandinaviai 
region, was associated with the echo of the “polar” function of Mitgard, of the pri¬ 
mordial “center”; this was a transposition of memories from the physical to the meta¬ 
physical dimension by virtue of which Gardarike was also identified with Asgard. 
Asgard allegedly was the dwelling place of nonhuman ancestors of the noble Nordic 
families; in Asgard, Scandinavian sacred kings such as Gilfir, who had gone there to 
proclaim their power, allegedly received the traditional teaching of the Edda . Asgard 
was also a sacred land, the land of the Nordic “Olympian” gods and of the Aesir, 
access to which was precluded to the race of the giants. 

These motifs were found in the traditional legacy of Nordic-Germanic popula¬ 
tions. As a view of the world, the insight into the outcome of the decline (ragna- 
rokkr) was associated with ideals and with figurations of gods who were typical of 
“heroic” cycles. As I have said, in more recent times this was a subconscious legacy; 

6. According to the original Nordic-Germanic view, die only people to enjoy divine immortality were, besides 
the heroes chosen by the Valkyries, (he nobles, by virtue of their nonhuman origin; apparently, only heroes 
and the nobles were cremated. In the Nordic tradition only this ritual, prescribed by Odin, opened the doors 
of Valhalla while (hose who were buried (a Southern ritual) were believed to become slaves of the earth. 

7. GyJfaginrsing, 3. 


292 


293 



Geheeis flnD Face of the FHoderii UJorld 


The Revival or the Eihpire atid the Ghibellihe Middle Ages 


the supernatural element became obscured by secondary and spurious elements of 
the myth and the saga, as did the universal element contained in the idea of Asgard- 
Mitgard, the “center of the world.” 

The contact of Germanic people with the Roman and Christian worid had a 
double effect. On the one hand their invasion resulted in a devastation of the mate¬ 
rial structure of the empire, while from an internal point of view it turned out to be a 
vivifying contribution that eventually established the presuppositions of a new and 
virile civilization destined to reaffirm the Roman symbol. In later times, in the same 
way, an essential rectification of Christianity and Catholicism took place, especially 
with regard to a general view of life. 

On the other hand, both the idea of Roman universalism and the Christian prin¬ 
ciple, in its generic aspect of affirmation of a supernatural order, produced an awak¬ 
ening of the highest vocation of Nordic-Germanic stocks; both ideas also contributed 
to the integration on a higher plane and to the revivification in a new form of what 
had often been materialized and particularized in them in the context of traditions of 
individual races. 8 “Conversion” to the Christian faith, more than altering the Ger¬ 
manic stocks’ strength, often purified it and prepared it for a revival of the imperial 
Roman idea. 

Many centuries ago, during the coronation of the king of the Franks, the formula 
renovatio Romani Imperii was spoken. Not only did they identify Rome as the sym¬ 
bolic source of their imperium and of their right, but the Germanic princes also ended 
up siding against the hegemonic demands of the Church; thus they became the pro¬ 
tagonists of a great new historical movement that promoted a traditional restoration. 

From a political perspective, the congenital ethos of the Germanic races conferred 
to the imperial reality a living, stable, and differentiated character. The life of the 
ancient Nordic-Germanic societies was based on the three principles of personality, 
freedom, and faithfulness. This life never knew the promiscuous sense of the com¬ 
munity nor the inability of the individual to make the most of himself other than in 
the context of a given abstract institution; in these societies to be free was the mea¬ 
sure of one’s nobility. And yet this freedom was not anarchical and individualistic, 
but it was capable of a dedication that went beyond the person, and it knew the trans¬ 
figuring value that characterized the principle of faithfulness toward one who is wor¬ 
thy of obedience and to whom people willingly submit themselves. Tlius, groups of 

8. This double influence Finds a typical expression in the Heliand. In this work, on the one hand Christ is 
portrayed with warrior and very unevangelica! traits; on the other hand, we find the overcoming of that 
dark view of destiny (Word) that in later times will become dominant in German history. In the Heliand 
Christ is the source of the Wurd and this force finds in him its Master, thus becoming the "wondrous power 
of God.” 


devoted subjects rallied around leaders to whom the ancient saying did apply: “The 
supreme nobility of a Roman emperor does not consist in being a master of slaves, 
but in being a lord of free men, who loves freedom even in those who serve him.” 
Also the state, almost like in the ancient Roman aristocratic concept, was centered 
on the council of leaders, each member being a free man, the lord of his lands, and 
the leader of the group of his faithful. Beyond this council, the unity of the state and, 
to a degree, its superpolitical aspect, was embodied by the king, since he belonged, 
unlike mere military leaders, to one of the stocks of divine origin; the Goths, for ex¬ 
ample, called their kings amals, the “pure ones,” or the “heavenly ones.” Originally, 
the material and spiritual unity of the nation was manifested only in the event of a 
particular action or the realization of a common mission, especially an offensive or 
defensive one. And in that circumstance a new condition set in. Next to the king, a 
leader, dux, or heritzogo was elected, and a new rigid hierarchy was spontaneously 
established; the free man became the leader’s immediate subordinate. The latter’s 
authority allowed him to take the life of his subject if he failed in his duties. Accord¬ 
ing to the testimony left to us by Tacitus, “the prime obligation of the entourage’s 
allegiance is to protect and guard him and to credit their own brave deeds to his gloiy/: 
the chieftains fight for victory, the entourage for the chieftain.” y Once the mission was 
accomplished, the original independence and pluralism were reestablished. 

The Scandinavian counts called their leader “the enemy of gold,” since as a leader 
he was not allowed to keep any gold for himself, and also “the host of heroes,” be¬ 
cause of the pride he took in hosting his faithful warriors, whom he regarded as his 
companions and equals, in his house. Even among the Franks prior to Charlemagne, 
participation in a particular mission occurred on a voluntary basis; the king invited 
people to participate, he appealed to them; at times the princes themselves proposed 
a course of action—in any event, there was neither “duty” nor impersonal “service,” 
since everywhere there were free and highly personalized relationships of command 
and obedience, mutual understanding and faithfulness. Thus, the idea of free person 
ality was the foundation of any unity and hierarchy. This was the “Nordic” seed from 
which the feudal system arose as the background to the new imperial idea. 

The development that led to such a regime began with the convergence of the 
ideas of king and leader. The king became the embodiment of the unity of the group 
even in time of peace; this was possible through the strengthening and the extension 
of the warrior principle of faithfulness to times of peace. A group of faithful retainers 
(e.g., the Nordic huskarlar, the Longobard gasindii , the Gothic palatines, the Frank 
antrustiones or convivae regis ), consisting of free men, gathered around the king; 

9. Tacitus, Germany, 14. 


294 


295 



Gehesit hod Face of the Modem UUorld 


The Revival of the Feme hod the Ghibeliihe Middle Rget 


these people regarded being in the service of their lord and the defense of his honor 
and right as both a privilege and a realization of a way of being more elevated than 
if they were merely answerable to no one but themselves. The feudal constitution 
was realized through the progressive extension of this principle, originally mani¬ 
fested in the Frank royalty, to various elements of the community. 

During the period of conquests a second aspect of the abovementioned develop¬ 
ment took place: the bestowal of conquered lands as fiefs in return for the commit¬ 
ment to faithfulness. The Frank nobility spread into areas that did not coincide with 
those of any given nation and became a bonding and unifying element. From a for¬ 
mal point of view, this development appeared to involve an alteration of the previ¬ 
ous constitution; to rule over a fief was regarded as a regal benefit contingent upon 
loyalty and service to the king. In reality, the feudal regime was a principle to be fol¬ 
lowed rather than a rigid reality; it was the general idea of an organic law of order 
that left ample room for the dynamic interaction of free forces fighting either side by 
side or against each other, without attenuations or alterations—subject before lord, 
lord before lord—and that caused everything (freedom, honor, glory, destiny, prop¬ 
erty) to be based on bravery and on the personal factor since nothing or virtually noth¬ 
ing was based on a collective element, public power, or abstract law. As it has rightfully 
been remarked, in the feudal system of the origins the fundamental and distinctive 
feature of regality was not that of a “public” power, but rather that of forces that were 
in the presence of other forces, each one responsible to itself for its own authority and 
dignity. Thus, such a state of affairs often resembled a state of war rather than that of 
a “society”; it was precisely because of this, however, that a particular differentia¬ 
tion of energies occurred. Never has man been treated so harshly as in the feudal 
system, and yet not only for the feudal lords who had the responsibility of protecting 
their rights and honor, but also for the subjects this regime was a school of indepen¬ 
dence and of virility rather than of servility; in this regime the relationships of faith¬ 
fulness and of honor played a larger role than in any other Western time period. 

Generally speaking, in this type of society, beyond the promiscuity of the Lower 
Empire and the chaos of the period of the invasions, everybody was able to find the 
place appropriate to his own nature, as is always the case wherever we find an im¬ 
material catalyst within the social organism. For the last time in Western history the 
quadripartition of society into serfs, merchants, warrior nobility, and representatives 
of spiritual authority (the clergy in the Guelph and the ascetic, knightly orders in the 
Ghibelline system) took form and affirmed itself in an almost spontaneous way. 

Ihe fact that tire feudal world of personality and of action did not exhaust the 
deepest possibilities of medieval man was proven by the fact that his Tides was able 
to develop in a sublimated form and be purified into the universal: such was the form 
that had the Empire as its reference point. The Empire was perceived as a 


superpolitical reality, an institution of supernatural origin that fonned one power 
with the divine kingdom. While in the Empire the same spirit that shaped the indi¬ 
vidual feudal and regal units continued to act, its peak was the emperor, who was 
regarded not as a mere man, but rather as a deusdiomo tot us deificatus et sanctificatus, 
adorandus quia praesul princeps ct summus est, according to the characteristic ex¬ 
pression of the time. Thus, the emperor embodied the function of a “center” in the 
eminent sense of the word and demanded from his subjects and from the feudal lords 
a spiritual acknowledgment similar to what the Church claimed for herself in order 
to realize a higher European traditional unity. Since two suns cannot coexist in the 
same planetary system, and since the image of the two suns was often applied to the 
duality of Church and Empire, the struggle between these two universal powers, 
which were the supreme reference points of the great ordinatio ad unum of the feu¬ 
dal world, was bound to erupt. 

On both sides there were compromises and more or less conscious concessions 
to the opposing principle. The meaning of such a struggle, however, eludes both 
those who stop at a superficial level and at everything that from a metaphysical point 
of view is regarded as a mere occasional cause—thus seeing in it only a political 
competition and a clash of interests and ambitions rather than a material and spiri¬ 
tual struggle—and those who regard this conflict as one between two opponents who 
are fighting over the same thing, each claiming the prerogative of the same type of 
universal power. On the contrary, the struggle hides the contrast between two incom¬ 
patible visions; this contrast points once again to the antithesis of North and South, of 
solar and lunar spirituality. The universal ideal of a “religious” kind advocated by 
the Church is opposed to the imperial ideal, which consists in a secret tendency to 
reconstruct the unity of the two powers, of the regal and the hieratic, or the sacred 
and the virile. Although the imperial idea in its external expressions often claimec 
for itself the dominion of the coipus and of the ordo of the medieval ecumene; anc 
although the emperors often embodied in a mere formal way the living Jex and 
subjected themselves to an asceticism of power 10 —the idea of “sacred regality” 
appeared yet again on a universal plane. Wherever history hinted only implicitly at 
this higher aspiration it was the myth that bespoke it; the myth was not opposed to 
history, but rather revealed its deeper dimension. I have previously suggested that in 

10. No matter how powerful and pride till, no medieval monarch ever felt capable of performing the function 
of the rite and the sacrifice (as with the ancient sacred kings) that had become the legacy of the clergy. 
Although the Hohenstaufen laid claim to the supernatural character of the Empire, they failed to reinte¬ 
grate in their representative the primordial function of the rex snerorum, even though the Church had usurped 
the title of pontifex maximus that was proper to the Roman emperors. Even in the Ghibelline doctrine of 
Hugh of Fleury, the sacred primacy of the Empire was limited to the ordo (that is, to the external constitu¬ 
tion of Christianity) and was excluded from the dignitas, which belonged to Ihe Church alone. 


296 


297 



tasis aud Face of the (Hoderei UUorld 


The Revival of the Eme bad the Ghibellme ITIiddle Ages 


the medieval imperial legend there are numerous elements that refer more or less 
directly to the idea of the supreme “center”; these elements, through various sym¬ 
bols, allude to a mysterious relationship between this center and the universal au¬ 
thority and legitimacy of the Ghibelline emperor. The objects symbolizing initiatic 
regality were entrusted to him and at times the motif of the hero “who never died” 
and who had been brought to a “mountain” or to a subterranean seat was applied to 
him. In the emperor dwelt the force that was expected to reawaken at the end of a 
cycle, cause the Dry Tree to bloom, and assist him in the last battle against Gog and 
Magog’s onslaught. Especially in relation to the Hohenstaufen, the idea of a “di¬ 
vine” and “Roman stock” asserted itself; this stock was believed not only to be in 
charge of the regnum but also to be able to penetrate the mysteries of God, which 
other people can only perceive vaguely through images. 11 The counterpart of all this 
was a secret spirituality (see chapter 14) that was typical of yet another high point of 
the Ghibelline and feudal world: chivalry. 

By producing chivalry that world demonstrated once again the efficiency of a 
superior principle. Chivalry was the natural complement of the imperial idea; be¬ 
tween these two there was the same relationship as existed between the clergy and 
the Church. Chivalry was like a “race of the spirit” in which the purity of blood 
played an important role as well; the Northern-Ary an element present in it was puri¬ 
fied until it reached a universal type and ideal in terms that coiTesponded to what the 
civisromanus had originally been in the world. 

Even in chivalry we can distinctively see the extent to which the fundamental 
themes of early Christianity had been overcome and how the Church herself was 
forced to sanction, or at least to tolerate, a complex of principles, values, and cus¬ 
toms that can hardly be reconciled with the spirit of her origins. Without repeating 
what has been said previously, I would like to recap the main points. 

Within a nominally Christian world, chivalry upheld without any substantial 


11. Ernst Kamorowicz spoke about the “empire breed” in reference to the Hohenstaufen: “A special virtue 
resided in this race, and to their offspring it was given To know the mysteries of the kingdom of God .,. 
but to others only in parables. . . . The divine stock of the Roman Caesars appears once more in the 
Hohenstaufen, ‘the heaven-bom race of the God Augustus, whose star is unquenched forever,' a race which 
springs from Aeneas, the father of the Roman people, and descends through Caesar to Frederick and his 
offspring in direct descent. All members of this imperial race are called divine. The predecessors on the 

imperial throne are divi and the living no less, finally all members of the Hohenstaufen family_ 

The imperial office had been held divine by Barbarossa; now gradually not only Frederick’s person 
but the Hohenstaufen race and the Hohenstaufen blood was Caesarean and divine. But for one half- 
century of Staufen rule, the longed for Third Frederick whom the Sybils had foretold, and the West would 
have seen the God Augustus marching in the flesh through the gates of Rome, would have burnt incense 
on his altars and offered sacrifice. In the Hohenstaufens the son of God had appeared for the last time on 
earth.” From Frederick the Second, trans. E. 0. Lorimer (New York, 1931), 572-73. 


alterations an Aryan ethics in the following things: (1) upholding the ideal of the hero 
rather than of the saint, and of the conqueror rather than of the martyr; (2) regarding 
faithfulness and honor, rather than caritas and humbleness, as the highest virtues; (3) 
regarding cowardice and dishonor, rather than sin, as the worst possible evil; (4) 
ignoring or hardly putting into practice the evangelical precepts of not opposing evil 
and not retaliating against offenses, but rather, methodically punishing unfairness 
and evil; (5) excluding from its ranks those who followed the Christian precept “Thou 
Shalt Not Kill” to the letter; and (6) refusing to love one’s enemy and instead fighting 
him and being magnanimous only after defeating him. 

Secondly, the “test of arms” that consisted in settling all disputes through strength 
(regarded as a virtue entrusted by God to man in order to promote the triumph of 
justice, truth, and the law here on earth) became a fundamental idea that reached far 
beyond the context of feudal honor and law into the context of theology, in which it 
was applied under the name of “God’s ordeal,” even in matters of faith. This idea 
was not really a Christian one; it was rather inspired by the mystical doctrine of 
“victory” that ignored the dualism proper to religious views, united spirit and might, 
and saw in victory some sort of divine consecration. The theistic watered-down ver¬ 
sion of this docuine, according to which during the Middle Ages people usually thought 
that victory was brought about by a direct intervention of God, did not affect the 
innermost spirit of these customs. 

If chivalry professed “faithfulness” to the Church as well many elements sug¬ 
gest that this was a devotion similar to that tributed to various ideals and to th< 
“woman” to whom a knight committed his own life; what really mattered to tht 
knight and to his way was a generic attitude of heroic subordination of both his hap¬ 
piness and his life, rather than the issue of faith in a specific and theological sense. I 
have already suggested that both chivalry and the Crusades, besides their outer and 
exoteric aspect, also had an esoteric dimension. 

As far as chivalry is concerned, I have already mentioned that it had its “Mys¬ 
teries,” a temple that most definitely did not correspond to the Church of Rome, and 
a literature and sagas in which ancient pre-Christian traditions became alive again; 
among these things, the most characteristic was the saga of the Grail because of the 
emergence within it of the theme of initiatic reintegration, the goal of which was to 
restore a fallen kingdom. 12 This theme developed a secret language that often 

12. See tny IJ mistero del GraaJ. Though the “Grail’s regal character” was the central symbol of the secret 
Ghibelline tradition, the symbolical genealogy presented by Wolfram von Eschenbach shows the relation 
existing between this tradition, the notion of “Universal Ruler,” and the anti-Guelph aspect of the Cru¬ 
sades. This genealogy connects the Grail’s kings with “Prester John” (who happens to be one of the 
medieval representations of the "Universal Ruler”) and with the Knight of the Swan, a symbolic name 
given to leaders of the Crusades such as Godfrey of Bouillon. 


298 


299 




Gehefif hod Face of the Modem UJorld 


The Revival of the Eidpiuf mid the Ghibellihe Middle Ages 


concealed an uttermost disdain for the Roman Curia. Even within the great histori¬ 
cal knightly orders, which were characterized by the peculiar tendency to reunite 
the types of the warrior and the ascetic, we find underground currents that, when¬ 
ever they surfaced, brought upon these orders the suspicion and persecution of the 
official religion. In reality, chivalry was animated by the impulse toward a “tradi¬ 
tional” restoration in the highest sense of the word, with the silent or explicit over¬ 
coming of the Christian religious spirit (see for instance the symbolic ritual of the 
rejection of the Cross allegedly practiced among the Knights Templar). The ideal 
center of all this was the Empire. This is how the legends arose that revived the 
theme of the Dry Tree, the blossoming of which was attributed to an emperor who 
will wage war against the clergy, so much so that at times he came to be regarded 
as the Antichrist (see for instance the Compendium tl\eologiae)\ this was, on the 
part of the Church, an obscure and distorted expression of the perception of a 
spirituality irreconcilable with the Christian spirituality. 

In the period in which victory seemed to be within the grasp of Frederick II, 
popular prophecies claimed: “The tall Cedar of Lebanon will be cut down. There 
will only be one God, namely, a monarch. Woe to the clergy! If it ever falls, a new 
order is ready to be implemented!” 

During the Crusades, for the first and only time in post-Roman Europe, the 
ideal ot the unity of nations (represented in peacetime by the Empire) was achieved 
on the plane of action in the wake of a wonderful elan, and as if in a mysterious 
reenactment of the great prehistoric movement from North to South and from 
West to East. The analysis of the deep forces that produced and directed the 
Crusades does not fit in with the ideas typical of a two-dimensional historiogra¬ 
phy. In the movement toward Jerusalem what often became manifested was an 
occult current against papal Rome that was fostered by Rome itself; in this current 
chivalry was the militia and the heroic Ghibelline ideal was the liveliest force. 
This current culminated in an emperor who was stigmatized by Gregory IX as one 
who threatens to replace the Christian faith with the ancient rites of the pagan 
populations, and who by sitting in the Temple usuips the functions of the priest¬ 
hood. The figure of Godfrey of Bouillon—the most significant representative of 
crusader chivalry, who was called lux monarchorum (which again reveals the 
ascetical and warrior element proper to this knightly aristocracy)—was that of a 
Ghibelline prince who ascended to the throne of Jerusalem after visiting Rome 
with blood and iron, killing the anti-Caesar Rudolf of Rhinefeld and expelling the 
pope from the holy city. The legend also established a meaningful kinship be¬ 
tween this king of the crusaders and the mythical Knight of the Swan (the French 


Helias, the Germanic Lohengrin 13 ), who in turn embodies symbols that were im¬ 
perially Roman (his symbolic genealogical descent from Caesar himself), solar 
(the etymological relation between existing between Helias, Helios, and Elijah), 
and Hyperborean (the swan that leads Lohengrin from the “heavenly seat” was 
also the animal representing Apollo among the Hyperboreans and a recurrent 
theme in paleographic traces of the Northem-Aryan cult). The body of such his¬ 
torical and mythical elements causes Godfrey of Bouillon to be a symbol during 
the Crusades, because of the meaning of that secret force that had a merely exter¬ 
nal and contingent manifestation in the political struggle of the Teutonic emperors 
and in the victory of Otto I. 

In the ethics of chivalry and the harsh articulation of the feudal system that was 
so distant from the social ideal of the primitive Church; in the resurrected principle of 
a warrior caste that had been reintegrated in a way that was both ascetical and sa¬ 
cred; and in the secret ideal of the Empire and the Crusades, the Christian influence 
encountered very precise limitations. On the one hand, the Church partially accepted 
these limitations; she allowed herself to be dominated—it became “Romanized”— 
in order to dominate and to remain in control. On the other hand, she resisted by 
attempting to replace the top of the political hierarchy and to overcome the Empire. 
The rending of the social fabric continued. The forces that were awakened occasion¬ 
ally escaped from the control of the people who had evoked them. When both adver¬ 
saries disengaged from the mortal duel in which they were locked, they separately 
underwent a process of decadence. The tension toward the spiritual synthesis weak¬ 
ened. The Church increasingly renounced its claim to temporal power and royalty its 
claim to spiritual power. Following the Ghibelline civilization, which we may regard 
as the splendid spring season of a Europe that was destined to doom, the process of 
decadence will continue inexorably. 


13, In the Knight of the Swan, whose homeland is in heaven and who turns down Elsa’s love, we find the 
nntigynaecocratic theme proper of the heroic cycles already found in the myths of Heracles, Aeneas, 
Gilgamesh, Rostam, and so on. 


300 


301 



33 



Decline of the Medieval World 
and the Birth of Nations 


T he decadence of the Holy Roman Empire and, generally speaking, of the prin¬ 
ciple of true sovereignty was determined by a range of causes from above and 
below. One of the main causes was the gradual secularization and materialization of 
the political idea. As far as the Empire was concerned, the struggle Frederick II 
waged against the Church, though it was undertaken for the defense of its supernatu¬ 
ral character, was associated with an initial upheaval in the following sense: on the 
one hand, there were (a) the incipient humanism, liberalism, and rationalism of the 
Sicilian court; (5) the institution of a body of lay judges and administrative function¬ 
aries; and (c) the importance given to the Law by legislators and by those whom a 
rightful religious rigorism (that reacted to the early products of “culture” and “free 
thought” with autos-da-fe and executions) contemptuously qualified as theologi 
philosophantes. On the other hand, there was the centralizing and antifeudal ten¬ 
dency of some recent imperial institutions. The moment an empire ceases to be 
sacred, it also ceases to be an empire; the inner vision animating the empire and its 
authority decline, and once the plane of matter and of mere “politics” is reached they 
totally disappear, since such a plane, by its very nature, excludes every universalism 
and higher unity. As early as 1338, King Ludwig IV of Bavaria declared that the 
imperial consecration was no longer necessary and that the elected prince was the 
legitimate emperor by virtue of this election; Charles IV of Bohemia completed this 
emancipation with the “Golden Bull.” Since the consecration, however, was not sub¬ 
stituted with something metaphysically comparable, the emperors themselves irre¬ 
vocably compromised their transcendent dignitas. From then on they lost “Heaven’s 
mandate” and the Holy Empire survived only nominally. Frederick III of Austria 
was the last emperor to be crowned in Rome (1452) after the rite had been reduced 
to an empty and soulless ceremony. 


302 


Dtcunt of the (TIcdievol World add the Birth op IldTioof 

Conversely, it has rightfully been suggested that the feudal system is that which 
characterizes the majority of the great traditional eras and the one most suited for the 
regular development of traditional structures. 1 In this type of regime the principle of 
plurality and of relative political autonomy of the individual parts is emphasized, as 
is the proper context of that universal element, that unum quod non est pars that 
alone can really organize and unify these parts, not by contrasting but by presiding 
over each one of them through the transcendent, superpolitical, and regulating func¬ 
tion that the universal embodies (Dante). In this event royalty works together with 
the feudal aristocracy and the imperial function does not limit the autonomy of the 
single principalities or kingdoms, as it assumes the single nationalities without alter¬ 
ing them. Conversely, when on the one hand the dignitas, which can rule trium¬ 
phantly beyond the multiple, temporal, and contingent falls into decline; and when, 
on the other hand, the capability of a fides and a spiritual acknowledgment on the 
part of the single subordinated elements fails—then what arises is either a centraliz¬ 
ing tendency and political absolutism (that attempts to hold the whole together through 
a violent, political, and state-enforced unity rather than through an essentially 
superpolitical and spiritual unity) or purely particularistic and dissociative processes. 
Either way accomplishes the destruction of medieval civilization. The kings begin to 
claim for their own fiefs the same principle of absolute authority that is typical of the 
empire, 2 thus spreading a new and subversive idea: the national state. By virtue ol 
an analogous process a variety of communes, free cities, republics, and other politi¬ 
cal entities that have a tendency to establish their independence, begin to resist and 
rebel, not only against the imperial authority, but against the nobility too. At this 
point the European ecumene begins to fall apart. The principle of a common body of 
laws declines, even though it leaves enough space for the articulations of a singular 
ius, that is a legislation that corresponds to the same language and a common spirit. 
Chivalry itself begins to decline and with it the ideal of a human type molded by 
principles of a purely ethical and spiritual nature; knights begin to defend the rights 
and to uphold the temporal ambitions of their lords, and eventually, of their respec¬ 
tive national states. The great forces brought together by the superpolitical ideal of 
“holy war” or “just war” are replaced by combinations of both peace and war, which 
are increasingly brought about by diplomatic shrewdness. Christian Europe power- 
lessly witnesses the fall of the Eastern Empire and of Constantinople at the hands of 
Ottomans; moreover, a king of France, Francis I, inflicted the first deadly blow to the 

1. R. Guenon, Autorite spirituelle el pouvoir temporei, 111. 

2. The French legislators were the first in Europe to claim that the king of a national state derives his power 
directly from God and is the “emperor of his kingdom.” 


303 



Genesis am Pace of the [Uodewi UJorld 


DEcunc of the Medieval UJorld and the Birth of Oatioiu 


myth of “Christendom” that was the foundation of the European unity when, in his 
struggle against the representative of the Holy Roman Empire, he did not hesitate to 
side with the rebellious Protestant princes, and even with the sultan himself. The 
League of Cognac (1526) saw the head of the Church of Rome do something similar; 
Clement VII, the ally of the king of France, went to war against the emperor, siding 
with the sultan right when the onslaught of Suleiman II in Hungary threatened Eu¬ 
rope and when Protestants in arms were about to ravage its heart. Also, a priest in the 
service of the king of France, Cardinal Richelieu, during the last phase of the Thirty 
Years War sided with the Protestant league against the emperor until, following 
the Peace of Augsburg (1555) the treaties of Westphalia (1648) swept away the last 
residue of the religious element, decreed the reciprocal tolerance between Protes¬ 
tant and Catholic nations and granted to the rebellious princes an almost total inde¬ 
pendence from the Empire. From that period on the supreme interest and the reason 
for struggle will not even be the ideal defense of a feudal or dynastic privilege, 
but mere disputes over paits of the European territory; the Empire was definitely 
replaced by imperialisms, that is, by the petty attempts of the national states to assert 
themselves either militarily or economically over other nations; this upheaval was 
in primis et ante omnia promoted by the French monarchy in a very specific anti¬ 
imperial manner. 

In the context of these developments, besides the crisis suffered by the imperial 
idea, the idea of royalty in general became increasingly secularized; the king be¬ 
came merely a wanior and the political leader of his state. He embodied for a little 
longer a virile function and an absolute principle of authority, yet without any refer¬ 
ence to a transcendent reality other than in the empty residual formulation of the 
“divine right” as it was defined in Catholic nations after the Council of Trent and 
during the age of the Counter Reformation. At that time the Chuich declared itself 
ready to sanction and consecrate the absolutism of sovereigns who had lost their 
sacred inner vocations as long as they were willing to be the secular arm of the 
Church, which by then had chosen to act indirectly upon European political affairs. 

For this reason, in the period following the decline of imperial Europe, we wit¬ 
ness in individual states the failure of the ideological premises that justified the struggle 
with the Church in the name of a higher principle; a more or less external acknowl¬ 
edgment was given to the authority of Rome in matters of religion in return for some¬ 
thing useful to the “reason of state.” Conversely, there were openly declared at¬ 
tempts to subordinate immediately the spiritual to the temporal sphere, as in the 
Anglican or Gallican upheaval and, later on, in the Protestant world, with the na¬ 
tional churches under state control. With the unfolding of the modem era it is pos¬ 
sible to witness the establishment of countries as if they were schisms, and their 


reciprocal opposition not only as political and temporal units but also as almost mys¬ 
tical entities refusing to submit to any superordained authority. 

One thing becomes very clear: if the Empire declines and if it continues to exist 
only nominally, its antagonist, the Church, after enjoying untrammeled freedom from 
its ancient foe, did not know how to assume its legacy, and demonstrated its inability 
to organize the Western world according to the Guelph ideal. What replaced the 
Empire was not the Church at the head of a reinvigorated “Christendom,” but the 
multiplicity of national states that were increasingly intolerant of any higher prin¬ 
ciple of authority. 

Moreover, the deconsecration of the rulers as well as their insubordination to¬ 
ward the Empire, by depriving the organisms over which they presided of the chrism 
bestowed by a higher principle, unavoidably pushed them into the orbit of lower 
forces that were destined to slowly prevail. Generally speaking, whenever a caste 
rebels against a higher caste and claims its independence, the higher caste unavoid¬ 
ably loses the character that it had within the hierarchy and thereby reflects the 
character of the immediately lower caste. 3 Absolutism—the materialistic transposi¬ 
tion of the traditional idea of unity—paved the way for demagogy and for republi¬ 
can, national, and antimonarchical revolutions. And in those countries in which the 
kings, in their struggle against feudal aristocracy and their work of political central¬ 
ization favored the claims of the bourgeoisie and of the plebs, the process ended 
even faster. Philip the Fair, who anticipated and exemplified the various stages of 
the involutive process, is often singled out as an example. With the pope’s complic¬ 
ity he destroyed the Templar order that was the most characteristic expression of the 
tendency to reconstruct the unity of the priestly and the warrior elements that was the 
soul of medieval chivalry. He started the process of lay emancipation of the state 
from the Church, which was promoted without interruptions by his successors, just as 
the struggle against the feudal nobility was carried on (especially by Louis XI and by 
Louis XIV) without feeling any qualms about using the support of the bourgeoisie 
and without disavowing the rebellious spirit of lower social strata. Philip the Fair 
also favored the development of an antitraditional culture since his legislators were 
the true forerunners of modem laicism, being much earlier than the Renaissance 
humanists. 4 If, on the one hand, it is significant that a priest (Cardinal Richelieu) 
employed the principle of centralization against the nobility by replacing the feudal 
structures with the leveling, modern, binomial form (government and nation), on the 
other hand, Louis XIV, with his formation of public powers and systematic develop- 

3, R. Guenon, Autoriti spirituelle, III. 

4, Ibid., 112. 


304 


305 



Genesis and Face of the Modem World 


Decline of the Medieval World and the Birth of tons 


ment of national unity together with the political, military, and economic strengthen¬ 
ing of this very unity prepared the body, so to speak, for the incarnation of a new 
principle: the people and the nation as a mere collectivity. Thus, the anti-aristocratic 
action of the Icings of France—whose constant opposition to the Holy Empire has 
been noted—through the marquis of Mirabeau promoted the logical rebellion against 
these kings and their expulsion from their contaminated thrones. We can argue that 
since France initiated this upheaval and conferred an increasingly centralizing and 
nationalist character to the idea of the state, she was the first to witness the demise of 
the monarchical system and the advent of the republican regime in the sense of a 
decisive and manifest shift of power to the Third Estate. Thus, in the whole of Euro¬ 
pean nations, France became the main hotbed of the revolutionary ferment and of 
the lay and rationalistic mentality, which is highly deleterious for any surviving resi¬ 
due of the traditional spirit.' 5 

There is another specific and interesting complementary aspect of historical 
nemesis. The emancipation of the Empire from the states that had become absolutist 
was followed by the emancipation of sovereign, free, and autonomous individuals 
from the state. The former usurpation attracted and presaged the latter; eventually, 
in the atomized and anarchical states (as sovereign nations) the usurped sovereignity 
of the state was destined to be replaced with popular sovereignity in the context of 
which every authority and law are legitimate only and exclusively as the expres¬ 
sions of the will of the citizens who are single sovereign individuals; this is the 
democraticized and “liberal** state, a prelude to the last phase of this general involu¬ 
tion, that is, a purely collectivized society. 

Beside the causes “from above,” however, we should not forget the causes “from 
below,” which are distinct though parallel to the former ones. Every traditional orga¬ 
nization is a dynamic system that presupposes forces of chaos, inferior impulses, and 
interests as well as lower social and ethnic strata that are dominated and restrained 
by a principle of “form”; it also includes the dynamism of the two antagonistic poles. 
The superior pole, connected to the supernatural element of the higher strata, at¬ 
tempts to lift up the other pole, while the lower pole, which is connected to the mass 
or demos, attempts to pull down the higher pole. The emergence and liberation (i.e., 
revolt) of the lower strata are the counterpart of every weakening of the representa¬ 
tives of the higher principle and every deviation or degeneration of the top of the 
hierarchy. Therefore, because of the previously mentioned processes, the right of 

5. Ibid. The fact that Germanic populations, despite the Reformation, retained feudal structures longer than 
other people is due to the fact that they were the last to embody—up to World War I—a higher idea than 
that represented by nationalisms and by world democracies. 


demanding of one’s subjects the double tides (spiritual and feudal) increasingly de¬ 
generated; thus, the way was paved for a materialization of this fides in a political 
sense and for the aforesaid revolt. In fact, just as faithfulness with a spiritual founda¬ 
tion is unconditional, likewise, that which is connected to the temporal plane is con¬ 
ditioned and contingent and liable to be revoked depending on the empirical circum¬ 
stances. Also, the dualism of Church and state and the persistent opposition of the 
Church to the Empire were destined to contribute to lowering every fides to this 
inferior and precarious level. 

After all, during the Middle Ages it was the Church that “blessed” the betrayal 
of the fides by siding with the Italian communes and lending her moral and material 
support to their revolt against the Empire. The revolt of the communes, beyond the 
external aspect, simply represented the insurrection of the particular against the uni¬ 
versal in relation to a type of social organization that was no longer even modeled 
after the warrior caste, but after the third caste, the bourgeoisie and the merchant 
class, who usurped the dignity of the political government and the right to bear aims, 
fortified its cities, raised its battle flags, and organized its armies against the imperial 
cohorts and the defensive alliance of the feudal nobility. Here began the movement 
from below and the rise of the tide of the inferior forces. 

While the Italian communes anticipated the profane and antitraditional ideal of 
a social organization based on the economic and mercantile factor and the Jewish 
commerce with gold, their revolt demonstrated how, in some areas, the sensibility 
that embraced the spiritual and ethical meaning of loyalty and hierarchy was al¬ 
ready at that time on the verge of becoming extinct. The emperor came to be per¬ 
ceived as a mere political leader whose political claims could be challenged. This 
marked the advent of that bad freedom that will destroy and deny every principle of 
true authority, abandon the inferior forces to themselves, and reduce to a merely 
human, economic, and social plane any political form, culminating in the omnipo¬ 
tence of the “merchants” first and of “organized labor” later. It is significant that the 
principal hotbed of this cancer was the Italian soil that had previously been the cradle 
of the Roman world. In the historical struggle of the communes, which were sup¬ 
ported by the Church against the imperial armies and the corpus saeciilariam 
principium, we find the last echoes of the struggle between North and South, tradi¬ 
tion and antitradition. The truth is that Frederick I—-a figure whom the plebeian 
falsification of the Italian “patriotic” history has repeatedly attempted to discredit- 
fought in the name of a higher principle and out of a sense of duty, derived from his 
own function, against a lay and particularistic usurpation that was based, among 
other things, on unprovoked violations of pacts and oaths. Dante called him the “good 
Barbarossa” and regarded him as the legitimate representative of the Empire and 


306 


307 



Genesis rod Face of the Modern World 


Declihe of the ITIedieval World add the Birth of [tans 


the source of any true authority. Moreover, Dante regarded the revolt of the Lombard 
cities as an illegal and biased struggle due to his noble contempt for the “newcomers 
and upstarts'' 6 and for the elements of the new and impure power of the communes; 
likewise, he saw in the self-government of the individual populations and in the new 
nationalistic idea a subversive heresy. 7 In reality, the Ottos and the Suevians waged 
their struggle not so much in order to impose a material acknowledgment or because 
of territorial ambitions, but rather for an ideal revendication and the defense of a 
superpolitical right. They demanded obedience not as Teutonic princes, but as “Ro¬ 
man” (romanorum reges) yet supemational emperors; they fought against the rebel¬ 
lious race of merchants and burghers in the name of honor and spirit. 8 The latter 
came to be regarded as rebels, not so much against the emperor, but rather against 
God (obviare Deo), By divine injunction (jubente Deo) the prince waged war against 
them as the representative of Charlemagne, brandishing the “avenging sword” in 
order to restore the ancient order (redditurres publica). 9 10 

Finally, especially in the case of Italy, in the so-called seigneuries (the counter¬ 
part or the successors of the communes) it is possible to detect another aspect of the 
new climate, of which Macchiavelli’s Prince represented a clear barometric index. 
During these times, the only person considered fit for government was a powerful 
individual who would rule not by virtue of a consecration, his nobility, and his repre¬ 
senting a higher principle and a tradition, but rather in his own name and by employ¬ 
ing cunning, violence, and the means of “politics,” which by then was regarded as an 
“art,” a technique devoid of scruples, honor, and truth with religion having become 
only an instrument to be employed in its service. Dante correctly said: “Italorum 
principum . . . qui non heroico more sed plebeo, secuntur superbiam .”'° Thus, the 
substance of such government was not “heroic” but plebeian; the ancient virtus de¬ 
scended to this level as did the sense of superiority to both good and evil typically 
exhibited by those who ruled on the basis of a nonhuman Jaw. On the one hand, we 

6. Dante, The Divine Comedy, Inferno 16.73. 

7. D. Flori, Dell’idea imperials di Dante (Bologna, 1912), 38; 86-87. 

8. Dante did not hesitate to criticize Lhe growing nationalist aberration, particularly by opposing the French 
monarchy and by upholding the right of the emperor. In the case of Henry VII, he realized that if a nation 
like Italy, for instance, wanted to irradiate its civilization in the world it had to disappear into the Empire, 
since only the Empire is true universalism; thus, in his view, any rebellious force following the new 
principle upheld by "cities” and by homelands was destined to become an obstacle to the "kingdom of 
justice.” 

9. These are Dante's words. Interestingly enough, Barbarossa, in his struggle against the communes, was 
compared to Heracles, who was the hero allied to Olympian forces struggling against the forces of chaos. 

10. De vulgari cjoqucntia, 1.12. In reference to the Renaissance F. Schuon has rightly spoken of a "Caesarism 
of the bourgeoisie and of the bankers”; to these I would add the figures of the condottieri, who were 
mercenary leaders who made themselves kings. 


see the reappearance of the model of ancient tyrannies; on the other hand, we find 
the expression of that unrestrained individualism that characterizes these new times 
according to multiple forms. Here we also find the anticipation, in a radical way, of 
the type of “absolute politics” and the will to power that in later times will be imple¬ 
mented on a much greater scale. 

The cycle of the medieval restoration ended with these processes. Somehow we 
can say that the gynaecocratic, Southern ideal triumphed again; in the context of this 
ideal, the virile principle, apart from the abovementioned extreme forms, carried 
only a material (i.e., political and temporal) meaning even when it was embodied in 
the person of the monarch; conversely the Church remained the depository of spiritu¬ 
ality in the “lunar” form of devotional religion and, at most, in the monastic and 
contemplative orders. After this scission occurred, the privilege of blood and the land 
or the expressions of a mere will to power became definitely predominant. An un¬ 
avoidable consequence of this was the particularism of the towns, the homelands, 
and the various nationalisms. What followed was the incipient revolt of the demos, 
the collective element that was at the bottom of the traditional social order and that 
now attempted to take control of the leveled social structures and the unified public 
powers that were created during the previous, antifeudal phase. 

The struggle that had most characterized the Middle Ages, that of the “heroic” 
virile principle against the Church, ended. From now on, Western man would yearn 
for autonomy and emancipation from the religious bond only in the forms of a devia¬ 
tion, in what could be characterized as a demonic distortion of Ghibellinism that was 
foreshadowed with the taking up of Lutheranism by the German princes. Generally 
speaking, after the Middle Ages, the West as a civilization became emancipated 
from the Church and from the Catholic Weltanschauung only by becoming secular¬ 
ized under the aegis of naturalism and of rationalism, and by extolling as a sign of 
conquest the impoverishment proper to a perspective and a will that do not recognize 
anything beyond man and beyond what is conditioned by the human element. 

One of the commonplaces of modern historiography is the polemical exaltation 
of the civilization of the Renaissance over and against medieval civilization. This is 
not just the expression of a typical misunderstanding, since this mentality is the ef¬ 
fect of one among the innumerable deceptions purposely spread in modem culture 
by the leaders of global subversion. The truth is that after the collapse of the ancient 
world, if there ever was a civilization that deserves the name of Renaissance, this 
was the civilization of the Middle Ages. In its objectivity, its virile spirit, its hierar¬ 
chical structure, its proud antihumanistic simplicity so often permeated by the sense 
of the sacred, the Middle Ages represented a return to the origins. I am not looking at 
the real Middle Ages and at its classical features through rose-colored lenses. The 


308 


309 



Genesis mid Frce op the Modem LUorld 


Decline of the Medieval LJorld nnd the Birth of tons 


character of the civilization coming after it must be understood otherwise than it has 
been. During the Middle Ages the tension that had an essentially metaphysical ori¬ 
entation degenerated and changed polarity. The potential that was previously found 
in the vertical dimension (upwards, as in the symbol of Gothic cathedrals), flowed 
outward into the horizontal dimension, thus producing phenomena that made an im¬ 
pression on the superficial observer. In the domain of culture this potential produced 
the tumultuous outburst of multiple forms of a creativity almost entirely deprived of 
any traditional or even symbolic element, and also, on an external plane, the almost 
explosive scattering of European populations all over the world during the age of 
discoveries, explorations, and colonial conquests that occurred during the Renais¬ 
sance and the age of humanism. These were the effects of a scattering of forces 
resembling the scattering of forces that follows the disintegration of an organism. 

According to some, the Renaissance represented a revival of the ancient classi¬ 
cal civilization that allegedly had been rediscovered and reaffirmed against the dark 
world of medieval Christianity. This is a major blunder. The Renaissance either 
borrowed decadent forms from the ancient world rather than the forms of the origins 
permeated by sacred and superpersonal elements, or, totally neglecting such ele¬ 
ments, it employed the ancient legacy in a radically new fashion. During the Renais¬ 
sance, “paganism” contributed essentially to the development of the simple affirma¬ 
tion of man and to fostering the exaltation of the individual, who became intoxicated 
with the products of an art, erudition, and speculation that lacked any transcendent 
and metaphysical element. 

In relation to this, it is necessary to point out the phenomenon of neutralization. 
Civilization, even as an ideal, ceased to have a unitary axis. The center no longer 
directed the individual parts, not only in the political, but in the cultural context as 
well. There no longer was a common organizing force responsible for animating 
culture. In the spiritual space the Empire fonnerly encompassed unitarily in the ecu¬ 
menical symbol, there arose by dissociation, dead or “neutral” zones that corresponded 
to the various branches of the new culture. Art, philosophy, science, and law each 
developed within their own field of competence, displaying a systematic and flaunted 
indifference toward anything that could encompass them, free them from their isola¬ 
tion, or give them true principles: such was the “freedom” of the new culture. The 
seventeenth century, together with the end of the Thirty Years War and the funda¬ 
mental overthrow of the Empire, was the age in which this upheaval assumed a 
radical form, anticipating what is proper to the modem age. 

Thus ended the medieval impulse to pick up again that torch that ancient Rome 
had received from the heroic, Olympian Hellas. The tradition of initiatory regality 
ceased to have contacts with historical reality and with the representatives of any 


European temporal power; it continued to exist only underground, in secret currents 
such as Hermeticism and Rosicrucianism, which increasingly withdrew inward as 
the modern world was taking form—when the organizations that they animated did 
not themselves undergo a process of involution and inversion. 11 As a myth, medieval 
civilization left its testament in two legends. According to the first legend, every year 
on the night of the anniversary of the suppression of the order of the Knights Templar, 
an armed shadow wearing a red cross on its white mantle allegedly appears in the 
crypt of the Templars to inquire who wants to free the Holy Sepulcher: “No one,” is 
the reply, “since the Temple has been destroyed,” According to the second legend, 
Frederick I still lives with his knights, although asleep, on the Kifhauser heights 
inside a symbolic mountain. He awaits the appointed time when he will descend to 
the valleys below at the head of his faithful in order to fight the last battle, whose 
successful outcome will cause the Dry Tree to bloom again and a new age to begin. 12 


11. Sec my II mistero del Grnal, chap. 29, especially in regard to the genesis and the meaning of modern 
Masonry and of the Enlightenment, as prime examples of this inversion. 

12. B. Kluger, Storia delle Crociate (1887). From the context of the various versions of the second legend 
what emerges is the idea that a victory is possible but not certain. In some versions of the saga—which 
were probably influenced by the Eddie theme of rngna rok —the last emperor cannot overcome the forces 
of the last age and dies after hanging his scepter, crown, and sword in the Dry Tree. 


310 


311 



UOREflUSm MID IllDIVIDUflLISm 


34 


Unrealism and Individualism 


I n order to follow the further phases of the decline of the West, it is necessary to 
refer to what I have previously said about the first crises undergone by tradi¬ 
tional civilizations and to assume as a reference point the fundamental truth of the 
world of Tradition concerning the two “regions” of world and superworld. According 
to traditional man, these two regions formed one reality; the establishment of an 
objective and efficacious contact between them was the presupposition of any higher 
form of civilization and life. 

The interruption of such a contact; the centering of all the possibilities in only 
one of these worlds, that is, in the human and temporal world; the replacement of the 
experience of the overworld with ephemeral ghosts and with the by-products of a 
merely human nature—these are the characteristics of “modem” civilization in gen¬ 
eral; this civilization has reached the stage in which the various forces of decadence, 
which were manifested in previous times but which had been successfully slowed 
down either by reactions or by the power of opposite principles, finally reach a com¬ 
plete and fearful efficiency. 

In a general sense, humanism may be regarded as the main trait and password 
of the new civilization that claims to have emancipated itself from the “darkness of 
the Middle Ages.” This civilization will only be limited to the human dimension; in 
this type of civilization everything will begin and end with man, including the heav¬ 
ens, the hells, the glorifications, and the curses. The human experience will be con¬ 
fined to this world—which is not the real world—with its feverish and yearning crea¬ 
tures, its artistic vanities and its “geniuses,” its countless machines, factories, and 
leaders. 

The earliest version of humanism was individualism. Individualism should be 
regarded as the constitution of an illusory center outside the real center; as the pre¬ 
varicating pretense of a “self” that is merely a mortal ego endowed with a body; and 
as by-product of purely natural faculties that, with the aid of arts and profane sci¬ 


ences, create and support various appearances with no consistency outside that false 
and vain center. These truths and laws are marked by the contingency and caducity 
proper to what belongs to the world of becoming. 

Hence, there is a radical unrealism and inorganic character to all modern phe¬ 
nomena. Nothing is endowed any longer with true life and everything will be a by¬ 
product; the extinct Being is replaced in every domain with the “will” and the “self,” 
as a sinister, rationalistic, and mechanical propping up of a cadaver. The countless 
conquests and creations of the new man appear as the crawling of worms that occurs 
in the process of putrefaction. Thus, the way is opened to all paroxysms, to innovat¬ 
ing and iconoclastic manias, and to the world of a fundamental rhetoric in which, 
once the spirit was replaced with a pale image of itself, the incestuous fornications of 
man in tire form of religion, philosophy, art, science, and politics, will know no bounds. 

On a religious plane, unrealism is essentially related to the loss of the initiatic 
tradition. I have previously pointed out that in the past, only initiation ensured the 
objective participation of man in the superworld. Following the end of the ancient 
world and with the advent of Christianity, however, there no longer were the neces¬ 
sary conditions for the initiatory reality to constitute the supreme reference point of a 
traditional civilization. In this regard “spiritualism” was one of the factors that acted 
in the most negative way; the appearance and the diffusion of the strange idea of the 
“immortality of the soul,” which was regarded as the natural privilege of each and 
every one, eventually contributed to the loss of understanding of the meaning and 
necessity of initiation as the real operation that alone can free a person from all 
conditionings and destroy the mortal nature. What arose as a surrogate was the mys¬ 
tery of Christ and the idea of redemption in Christ; in this context, a theme that 
partially derived from the doctrine of the Mysteries (death and resurrection) lost its 
initiatory character and was eventually applied to the merely religious plane of faith. 
This surrogate, generally speaking, consisted in a particular “morality” and in lead¬ 
ing a life in view of the sanctions that, according to the new belief, awaited the 
“immortal soul” in the afterlife. If on the one hand the imperial medieval idea was 
often pervaded by the initiatory element, on the other hand, though the representa¬ 
tive of the Church developed a doctrine of the sacraments, revived the “pontifical” 
symbolism, and spoke of regeneration, nevertheless, the idea of initiation as such, 
which was opposite to its spirit, remained basically alien to it. Thus, an anomaly was 
created that lacked something in comparison with every other complete traditional 
form, Islam included. Christian dualism, in its specific character, represented a pow¬ 
erful incentive to subjectivism and therefore to unrealism in regard to the problem 
of the Sacred. The Sacred, from a matter of reality and transcendent experience, 
became either a matter of faith based on sentiment, or the object of theological 


312 


313 



Groii BUD fflCE Of THE (TIODERfl UJORLD 


UriREfiLiini BUD IriDiviDumism 


speculation. The few examples of a purified Christian mysticism could not prevent 
God and gods, angels and demons, intelligible essences and their dwellings from 
assuming the form of myth; the Christianized West ceased to have a knowledge of 
these things as symbols of potential superrational experiences, superindividual con¬ 
ditions of existence, and deep dimensions of integral being. The ancient world had 
witnessed the degeneration of symbolism into a mythology that became increasingly 
opaque and mute and that eventually became the object of artistic fantasy. When the 
experience of the sacred was reduced to faith, sentiment, and moralism, and when 
the Intuitio intellectual^ was reduced to a mere concept of Scholastic philosophy, 
the unrealism of the spirit entirely took over the domain of the supernatural. This 
course underwent a further development with Protestantism, the contemporaneity of 
which with humanism and with the Renaissance is significant. 

Prescinding from its final meaning in the history of civilization, its antagonistic 
role during the Middle Ages, and its lack of an initiatic and esoteric dimension, we 
nevertheless must acknowledge a certain traditional character to the Church that 
lifted it above what had been mere Christianity, because it established a system of 
dogmas, symbols, myths, rituals, and sacred institutions in which, though often indi¬ 
rectly, elements of a superior knowledge were sometimes preserved. By rigidly up¬ 
holding the principle of authority and dogma, by defending the transcendent and 
superrational character of “revelation” in the domain of knowledge and the principle 
of the transcendence of grace in the domain of action, the Church defended from any 
heresy—almost desperately—the nonhuman character of its deposit. This extreme 
effort of Catholicism (which explains much of whatever is crude and violent in its 
history), however, encountered a limit. The “dam” could not hold and some forms 
that could be justified in a merely religious context could not retain the character of 
absoluteness that is proper to what is nonhuman; this was especially true not only 
because a superior knowledge was lacking, but also considering that the seculariza¬ 
tion of the Church, the corruption, and the unworthiness of a great number of its 
representatives and the increasing importance that political and contingent interests 
acquired within it became increasingly visible. Thus, the stage was set for a reaction 
destined to inflict a serious blow to the traditional element that was added to Chris¬ 
tianity, to exasperate the unrealist subjectivism, and to uphold individualism in a 
religious context. For this is what the Reformation accomplished. 

It is not a coincidence that Luther’s invectives against the “papacy, the devil’s 
creature in Rome” and against Rome as the “kingdom of Babylon” and as a radically 
pagan reality totally inimical to the Christian spirit were very similar to those invec¬ 
tives employed by the early Christians and by the Jewish apocalyptic texts against 
the city of the eagle and of the battle-axe. By rejecting everything in Catholicism 


that was Tradition and opposed to the simple Gospels, Luther demonstrated a funda¬ 
mental misunderstanding of that superior content that cannot be reduced either to the 
Jewish-Southem substratum, or to the world of mere devotion, which in the Church 
had developed through secret influences from above . 1 The Ghibelline emperors rose 
up against papal Rome in the name of Rome, thus upholding again the superior idea 
of the Sacrum Imperium against both the merely religious spirituality of the Church 
and her hegemonic claims. Instead, Luther rose up against papal Rome out of an 
intense dislike for what was a positive aspect, that is, the traditional, hierarchical, 
and ritual component that existed within the Catholic compromise. 

In many regards Luther facilitated a mutilating emancipation, even in the do¬ 
main of politics. By supporting the Reformation the Germanic princes, instead of 
assuming the legacy of Frederick II, went over to the anti-imperial coalition. In the 
author of the Wamung an seine lieben Deutschen, who presented himself as the 
“prophet of the German people,” these princes saw one who legitimated their revolt 
against the imperial principle of authority with his doctrines and who allowed them 
to disguise their insubordination in the form of an anti-Roman crusade waged in the 
name of the Gospel, according to which they had no other goal than to be free Ger¬ 
man rulers and to be emancipated from any supemational hierarchical bond. Luther 
also contributed to an involutive process in another way; his doctrine subordinated 
religion to the state in all of its concrete manifestations. Because the government of 
the states was the responsibility of mere secular rulers; because Luther foreshad¬ 
owed a democratic theme that was later on perfected by Calvin (the rulers do not 
govern by virtue of their nature, but because they are the representatives of the 
community); because a characteristic of the Reformation was the radical negation of 
the “Olympian” or “heroic” ideal, or any possibility on man’s part to go beyond his 
limitations either through asceticism or consecration and so to be qualified to exer¬ 
cise even the right from above, which is typical of true leaders—because of all these 
reasons, Luther’s views concerning “secular authority” (die weltiche Obrigkeit) prac¬ 
tically amounted to an inversion of the traditional doctrine concerning the regal pri¬ 
macy and thus left the doors open for the usurpation of spiritual authority on the part 
of the temporal power. When defining the theme of the Leviathan, or of the “abso¬ 
lute state,” Hobbes similarly proclaimed: “civitatem et ecclesiam eadem rem esse. 7 ' 

From the point of view of the metaphysics of history, the positive and objective 

1. Naturally, this lack of understanding was typical of the representatives of Catholicism as well. Paracelsus 
was right when he said: “What is this commotion about Luther’s and Zwingli's writings? It truly reminds 
me of a shallow bacchanalia. If I had to make a recommendation about this controversy I would have 
these gentlemen and the pope himself go back to school.” 


314 


315 



GEntsis mid Pace of the PTIoderii UUorld 


contribution of Protestantism consists in having emphasized that in mankind living in 
recent times a truly spiritual principle was no longer immediately present and that, 
therefore, mankind had to portray this principle as something transcendent. On this 
basis, Catholicism itself had already assumed the myth of original sin. Protestantism 
exasperated this myth by proclaiming the fundamental powerlessness of man to 
achieve salvation through his own efforts; generally speaking, it regarded the whole 
of humankind as a damned mass, condemned to automatically commit evil. To the 
truth obscurely foreshadowed by that myth, Protestantism added tints typical of an 
authentic Syrian masochism that were expressed in rather revolting images. Over 
and against the ancient ideal of spiritual virility Luther did not hesitate to call a 
“royal wedding” one in which the soul, portrayed as a “prostitute” and as “the most 
wretched and sinful creature,” plays the role of the woman (see Luther’s De libenate 
Christiana ); and to compare man to a beast of burden on which either God or the devil 
ride at will, without his being able to do anything about it (see Luther’s De servo 
arbitrio ). 

While what should have followed from the acknowledgment of the 
abovementioned existential situation was the affirmation of the need for the support 
proper to a ritual and hierarchical system, or the affirmation of the strictest type of 
asceticism, Luther denied both things. The entire system of Luther’s thought was 
visibly conditioned by his personal equation and the gloomy character of his inner 
life as a failed monk and a man who was unable to overcome his own nature, influ¬ 
enced as it was by his passions, sensuality, and anger. This personal equation was 
reflected in the peculiar doctrine according to which the Ten Commandments had 
not been given by God to men to be implemented in this life but so that man, after 
acknowledging his inability to fulfill them, his nothingness, as well as concupiscence’s 
invincibility and his inner tendency to sin, would entrust himself to a personal God 
and trust desperately in His free grace. This “justification by faith alone” and the 
ensuing condemnation of the power of “works” led Luther to attack the monastic life 
and the ascetical life, which he called “vain and hopeless,” thus deterring Western 
man from pursuing those residual possibilities of reintegration available in the con¬ 
templative life that Catholicism had preserved and that had produced figures like 
Bernard of Clairvaux, Jan van Ruysbroeck, Bonaventure, and Meister Eckhart . 2 Sec- 


2. This is the main difference between Buddhism and Protestantism, which confers a positive character to 
the former and a negative to the latter. Both movements arc characterized by pessimist premises—Luther’s 
concupiscienlia invincibilis corresponds somewhat to Buddhism’s "thirst for life”—and by a revolt against 
a corrupted priestly caste. However, Buddhism indicated a path to follow since it created a strict system of 
asceticism and of self-discipline, unlike Protestantism, which rejected even the mitigated forms of asceti¬ 
cism found in the Catholic tradition. 


ondly, the Reformation denied the principle of authority and hierarchy in the dimen¬ 
sion of the sacred. The idea that a human being, as a pontifex, could be infallible in 
matters of sacred doctrine and also legitimately claim the right to an authority be¬ 
yond criticism was regarded as aberrant and absurd. According to the reformers, 
Christ did not give to any church, not even to a Protestant church, the privilege of 
infallibility ; 2 thus, anybody is able to reach conclusions in matters of doctrine and 
inteipretation of the sacred text through a free and individual examination outside 
any control and any tradition. Not only was the distinction between laity and priest¬ 
hood in the field of knowledge basically abolished, but also denied was the priestly 
dignity understood not as an empty attribute, but in reference to those who, unlike 
other people, are endowed with a supernatural chrism and who carry an indoles 
indelebilis that allows them to activate the rites (these being residues of the ancient 
notion of the “Lord of the rites ”). 4 Therefore, the objective, nonhuman meaning that 
not only the dogma and the symbols but the system of rites and the sacraments could 
have as well, was denied and rejected. 

One might object that all this no longer existed in Catholicism or that it existed 
only formally or indirectly. But in that case the way leading to an authentic reforma¬ 
tion should have been one and one alone: to act in earnest and replace the unworthy 
representatives of the spiritual principle and tradition with worthy ones. Instead, 
Protestantism has led to a destruction and a denial that were not balanced with any 
true constructive principle, but rather only with an illusion, namely, sheer faith. Ac¬ 
cording to Protestantism, salvation consisted in the mere subjective assurance of 
being counted in the ranks of those who have been saved by faith in Christ, and 
“chosen” by divine grace. In this fashion, mankind progressed along the path of 
spiritual unrealism; the materialistic repercussion did not delay its appearance. 

After rejecting the objective notion of spirituality as a reality ranking higher 
than profane existence, the Protestant doctrine allowed man to feel, in all aspects of 
life, as a being who was simultaneously spiritual and earthly, justified and sinner. In 
the end this led to a radical secularization of all higher vocations; again, not to 

3. De Maistre (Du pape [Lyon, 1819]) correctly remarked that this situation is paradoxical: Protestantism in 
fact upholds the idea that God did not bestow infallibility to man or to the Church as if it were a dogma. In 
Islam, infallibility (isma) is not regarded as the natural possession of an individual, but of all the legiti¬ 
mate interpreters of the tawil, the esoteric teaching, 

4. Within Catholicism, due to a confusion between what is proper to asceticism and what is proper to the 
priesthood, the clergy never was a real caste. Once the principle of celibacy was established, by virtue of 
this very principle Catholicism irremediably lost the possibility of connecting the deposit of certain spiri¬ 
tual influences with the deep-seated forces of a blood legacy that had been preserved from any corrupt 
influence. The clergy, unlike the noble class, was always affected by the promiscuity of the origins since 
it recruited its members from all social strata and therefore always lacked an “organic” (i.e., biological 
and hereditary) basis for those spiritual influences. 


316 


317 



Genesis hhd Fncc of the Modem UJorld 


sacralization, but to moralism and puritanism. It was in the historical development of 
Protestantism, especially in Anglo-Saxon Calvinism and Puritanism, that the reli¬ 
gious idea became increasingly dissociated from any transcendent interest and thus 
susceptible to being used to sanctify any temporal achievement to the point of gener¬ 
ating a kind of mysticism of social service, work, "progress,” and even profit. These 
fonns of Anglo-Saxon Protestantism were characterized by communities of believ¬ 
ers with no leader to represent a transcendent principle of authority; thus, the ideal of 
the state was reduced to that of the mere "society” of "free” Christian citizens. In this 
type of society, profit became the sign of divine election that, once the prevalent 
criterion became the economic one, corresponds to wealth and to prosperity. In this 
we can clearly distinguish one of the aspects of the abovementioned degrading re¬ 
gression: this Calvinist theory was really the materialistic and lay counterfeit of the 
ancient mystical doctrine of victory. For quite a long time this theory has supplied an 
ethical and religious justification for the rise to power of the merchant class and of 
the Third Estate during the cycle of the modem democracies and capitalism. 

The individualism intrinsic in the Protestant theory of private interpretation of 
Scripture was connected with another aspect of modern humanism: rationalism. The 
single individual who got rid of the dogmatic tradition and the principle of spiritual 
authority, by claiming to have within himself the capability of right discernment, 
gradually ended up promoting the cult of that which in him, as a human being, is the 
basis of all judgments, namely, the faculty of reason, thus turning it into the criterion 
of all certitudes, truths, and norms. This is precisely what happened in the West 
shortly after the Reformation. Naturally, there were some "germs” of rationalism in 
ancient Hellas (exemplified in the Socratic replacement of the concept of "reality” 
with reality itself) and in the Middle Ages (in the theology that was heavily influ¬ 
enced by philosophy). Beginning with the Renaissance, however, rationalism be¬ 
came differentiated and assumed, in one of its most important currents, a new 
character: from speculative in nature it became aggressive and generated the En¬ 
lightenment, Encyc loped ism, and antireligious and revolutionary criticism. In this 
regard, it is necessary to acknowledge the effects of further processes of involution 
and inversion that display an even more sinister character because they negatively 
affected some surviving organizations of an initiatic type, as in the case of the Illumi¬ 
nati and of modem Masonry. The superiority over dogma and over the merely reli¬ 
gious Western forms—a superiority granted to the initiate by the process of spiritual 
enlightenment—was claimed by those who upheld the sovereign power of reason. 
Members of such organizations promoted this inversion until they transformed the 
groups that they led into active instruments of the diffusion of antitraditional and 
rationalist thought. One of the most tangible examples of this is the role Masonry 


played in the American Revolution as well as in the underground ideological prepa¬ 
ration of the French Revolution and in the revolutions that occurred in Spain, Turkey, 
and Italy, among others. This is how the secret front of world subversion and 
countertradition was formed, not just through general influences alone, but also through 
specific centers of action. 

In yet another one of its "fifth columns,” which was limited to the domain of 
speculative thought, rationalism was destined to develop along unrealist lines and to 
generate Absolute Idealism and panlogism. The identity of spirit and thought, of 
concept and reality was upheld; logical hypostases such as the transcendental ego 
replaced the real ego as well as any premonition of the true supernatural principle 
within man. The so-called "critical thought that has reached consciousness of itself” 
declared: "Everything that is real is rational and everything that is rational is real,” 
which truly represents the extreme form of unrealism . 5 Rather than in similar philo¬ 
sophical abstractions, rationalism played a much more important role in a practical 
way in the construction of the modem world by joining forces with empiricism and 
experimentalism in the context of scientism. 

Again, the birth of modern naturalistic and scientific thought coincided with the 
Renaissance and the Reformation, since these phenomena were the expressions 
of the same one global upheaval. Individualism is necessarily associated with natu¬ 
ralism. 

With the revolt of individualism, all consciousness of the superworld was lost. 
The only thing that was still regarded as all-inclusive and certain was the material 
view of the world, or nature seen as exteriority and a collection of phenomena. A 
new way to look at the world had emerged. In the past there had been anticipations 
of this upheaval, but they remained sporadic apparitions that were never transformed 
into forces responsible for shaping civilizations . 6 It was at this time that reality be¬ 
came synonymous with materiality. The new ideal of science was concerned exclu¬ 
sively with the physical dimension and was eventually confined to a construction; 
this ideal no longer represented the synthesis of an intellectual intuition, but rather 
the effort of purely human faculties to unity the multiple varieties of impressions and 

5. Critical or “epistemological” idealism claimed to be the awareness of all other philosophical systems; in 
this it was right. It is the unrealism of philosophy in general that becomes aware of itself in the system, 
whereby the real becomes identical to the “rational,” the world to the “concept” of the world, and the “I” 
to the “thought” of the “I.” 1 have written at greater length about this in my Fenomenologia deil’individuo 
assolato (Turin, 1930). 

6. During the Middle Ages there was a revival of some of the traditional sciences; the view of nature Scho¬ 
lasticism constructed on the basis of Aristotelianisin, though constrained in a conceptualisl apparatus, still 
upheld the view of the qualities or of the formative virtues. 


318 


319 



Genesis mid Face oe the ftan LUorlo 


UnRCflusm finD InDiviDunusm 


sensible apparitions from the outside “inductively,” with the sense of touch rather 
than of sight. The conquests of science merely consisted in the discovery of math¬ 
ematical relations, laws of consistency and uniform succession, hypotheses, and ab¬ 
stract principles the value of which was exclusively determined by the capability of 
predicting, more or less exactly, the eventual outcome, yet without providing any 
essential knowledge and without revealing meanings capable of leading to an inner 
liberation and elevation. This dead knowledge of dead objects led to the sinister ail 
of producing artificial, automatic, and obscurely demonic entities. The advent of 
rationalism and scientism was unavoidably followed by the advent of technology 
and machines, which have become the center and the apotheosis of the new human 
world. 

Moreover, modem science is responsible for the systematic profanation of the 
two domains of action and contemplation, and also for the plebs’ rise to power in the 
European nations. It was science that degraded and democratized the very notion of 
knowledge by establishing the uniform criterion of truth and certainty based on the 
soulless world of numbers and the superstition represented by the “positivist” method, 
which is indifferent toward everything that presents a qualitative and symbolic char¬ 
acter in empirical data. It was science that precluded any appreciation of the tradi¬ 
tional disciplines; through the mirage of evident phenomena that are accessible to 
everyone science has upheld the superiority of lay culture by creating the myth of the 
scholar and of the scientist. It was science that, by dispelling the darkness of “super¬ 
stition” and of “religion,” and by insinuating the image of natural necessity, has 
progressively and objectively destroyed any possibility of a subtle relationship with 
the secret powers of things. It was science that snatched away from man the voice of 
the sea, the earth, and the heavens and created the myth of the “New Age of Progress," 
opening doors for everybody and fomenting the great rebellion of the slaves. It is 
science that today, by providing the instruments for the control and employment of 
every force of nature according to the ideals of a demonic conquest, has engendered 
the most formidable temptation ever to confront man: that he may mistake his renun¬ 
ciation as an act of real power and something to be proud of, and mistake a shadow 
of power for the real thing. 

This process of detachment, of loss of the superworld and tradition, of all- 
powerful laicism and triumphant rationalism and naturalism is identical both on the 
plane of the relationship between man and reality and on the plane of society, the 
state, and morality. When dealing with the issue of the death of civilizations, I have 
mentioned that the inner adherence of humble and ignorant people to leaders and 
traditional institutions was justified in that it represented a way leading to a fruitful 
hierarchical relationship with beings who knew and who “were” and who kept alive 


a nonhuman spirituality of which any traditional law was the embodiment and the 
adaptation. But when such a reference point is no longer present or when it is present 
only in a symbolic way, then subordination is vain and obedience is sterile; the final 
outcome is a petrification and not a ritual participation. And so, in the modern and 
humanized world that lacks the dimension of transcendence, any law of the hierar¬ 
chical order and stability was bound to disappear, especially on the outer plane, until 
the achievement of the state of radical atomization of the single individual, not only 
in matters of religion, but also in the political domain through the denial of any tradi¬ 
tional value, institution, and authority. Once the tides was secularized the revolt 
against spiritual authority was followed by the revolt against temporal power and by 
the revendication of “human rights”; by the affirmation of freedom and the equality 
of all human beings; by the definitive abolition of the idea of caste (which came to be 
understood in socioeconomic terms as “functional class”) and of privilege; and by a 
disintegration of the traditional social structures promoted by libertarianism. 

But the law of action-reaction determines a collectivist upheaval to follow auto¬ 
matically every individualistic usurpation. The casteless, the emancipated slave, and 
the glorified pariah (the modern “free man”) has against himself the mass of the 
other casteless and, in the end, the brute power of the collectivity. Thus, the process 
of disintegration continues and what ensues is a regression from the personal to the 
anonymous, the herd, and the pure, chaotic, and inorganic realm of quantity. Just as 
the scientific enterprise has sought, from the outside, to recreate the multiplicity of 
particular phenomena (while having lost that inner and true unity that exists only in 
the context of metaphysical knowledge), so have moderns tried to replace the unity 
that in ancient societies consisted of living traditions and sacred law with an exterior, 
anodyne, and mechanical unity in which individuals are brought together without an 
organic relation to each other, and without seeing any superior principle or figure, 
the obeying of which would mean consent, and submission to which would represent 
an acknowledgment and elevation. In this way new collective forms arise that are 
essentially based on the conditions of material existence and on the various factors 
of a merely social life, which in turn is dominated by the impersonal and leveling 
system of “public powers.” These collective forms soon overthrow individualism; 
and whether they present themselves in the guise of democracies or national states, 
republics or dictatorships, they begin to be carried along by independent subhuman 
forces. 

The most decisive episode in the unleashing of the European plebs, the French 
Revolution, already displays the typical traits of this overthrow. When studying the 
French Revolution it is possible to see how these forces soon escape from the control 
of those who have evoked them. Once the Revolution was unleashed, it seems as if 


320 


321 



Gedesis mid Pace of the IDokiii UJorld 


it assumed a life of its own, leading men, rather than the other way around; it even¬ 
tually devoured its own “children” one by one. Its leaders, rather than real personali¬ 
ties, appear to be the embodiment of the revolutionary spirit and to be carried along 
as inane and automatic objects. They ride the wave, so to speak, as long as they 
follow the current and are useful to the goals set by the Revolution; but as soon as 
they try to dominate it or to stop it, the maelstrom submerges them. Some specific 
traits of the French Revolution include the speed and the power with which it spread 
and the speed with which events followed one another and obstacles in its way were 
overcome; in these traits what is visible is the emergence of a nonhuman element 
and a subpersonal reality that has a mind and a life of its own and that employs men 
as mere tools. 7 

This very same phenomenon may be observed, though in different degrees and 
fonns, in some salient aspects of modem society in general, especially after the 
collapse of the last “dams.” Politically, the anonymous character of the structures 
that credit the people and the “nation” with the origin of all powers is interrupted 
only to generate phenomena that resemble totally the ancient popular tyrannies; that 
is, personalities that enjoy a brief popularity by virtue of their being masters in awak¬ 
ening the irrational forces of the demos and in directing their course, all the while 
lacking an authentically superior principle and thus having only an illusory dominion 
over what they have awakened. The acceleration that characterizes all falling bod¬ 
ies causes the phase of individualism and rationalism to be overcome and to be 
followed by the emergence of irrational and elemental forces characterized by mys¬ 
tical overtones. It is here that we encounter further developments in the well-known 
process of regression. In the domain of culture this regression is accompanied by an 
upheaval that has been characterized with the expression “treason of the clerics.” 8 

The people who still reacted against the materialism of the masses by adhering 
to disinterested forms of activity and to superior values, and who, by opposing their 
own faithfulness to higher interests and principles to the masses’ passionate and 
irrational life represented the vestiges of transcendence that at least prevented the 
inferior elements from turning their ambitions and their way of life into the only 
religion—these very same people in recent times have extolled that plebeian real¬ 
ism and that deconsecrated and inferior existence, and have conferred upon it the 
aura of a mysticism, a morality, and a religion. Not only did they began to cultivate 
realistic passions, particularisms, and political rivalries; not only did they begin fran¬ 
tically to pursue temporal achievements and conquests right at the time their moder¬ 
ating and contrasting role was needed the most to stem the surging power of the 

7. Observations by J. de Maistre in Considerations surla France (Lyon, 1860), 5-8. 

8. J. Benda, La Trahison des clercs { Paris, 1928). 


inferior element but—worse yet—they began to celebrate the only human possibili¬ 
ties that are worthy and fit to be cultivated, and the only ones from which man can 
draw the fullness of the moral and spiritual life. Thus, these people have supplied the 
passions and the instincts of the masses with powerful doctrinal, philosophical, and 
even religious justifications with the result of strengthening their power and at the 
same time covering with ridicule and contempt any transcendent interest or principle 
that is truly over and above the particularisms of race or nation and free of all human, 
sociopolitical conditionings. 9 In this we can recognize again the phenomenon of a 
pathological inversion of polarity; the human person, in his superior faculties, be¬ 
comes the instrument of other forces that replace him and that often use him to bring 
about spiritual havoc without him even realizing it. 10 

After all, when the intellectual faculties were applied in a systematic and con¬ 
certed way to the naturalistic inquiry, this represented a “treason.” The profane sci¬ 
ence that derived from this type of inquiry portrayed itself as the true science; it 
sided with rationalism in the attack against Tradition and religion; and it put itself in 
the service of the material needs of life, the economy, industry, production and over¬ 
production, and the lust for power and riches. 

The Law and morals became secularized along the same lines; they no longer 
were “from above and oriented downwards”; they lost every spiritual justification 
and purpose and they acquired a merely social and human meaning. It is significant 
that in some of the more recent ideologies they have claimed the same ancient au¬ 
thority, though with an inverted direction: “from below and upwards.” I am referring 
to the “morality” that recognizes a value in the individual only insomuch as he is a 
member of a collective, acephalous entity that identifies his destiny and happiness 
with the latter’s and denounces as “decadence” and as “alienation” any form of 
activity that is not socially “relevant” and in the service of the organized “plebs” that 
are on their way to conquering the planet. I will return to these considerations when 
discussing the specific forms with which the present cycle is about to end. At this 
point 1 will only mention the definitive overthrow of individualism that originated 
the process of disintegration, an individualism that no longer exists other than in the 
residues and the velleity of a pale and powerless “humanism” typical of bourgeois 
literates. With the principle according to which man, rather than as an individual, 
must be made to feel part of a group, faction, party, or collectivity, and have a value 

9. A, Tilgher, J. Benda t il problema del tradimento dei chierici (Rome, 1930). The “treason of the clerics/’ 
as Benda envisions it, is not a peculiar case of the phenomenon being discussed. The type of the “cleric” 
as a mere man of letters, philosopher, or moralist (Benda stops at this level) already represents that type 
of “betraying cleric." 

10. In the Chinese tradition ( Meng-tzu, 3.12) we find indications of this process in which individualism opens 
the gates to an obsessive phenomenon that puts man at the mercy of subpersonal and irrational faculties. 


322 


323 




GfAESIS AM) fflff Of IAE fllODERA UJORLD 


llllflMI'.llt AAA InDIVIDUAllifA 


only in relationship with these units, we find the reproduction of the relationship that 
primitive and savage man had toward the totem of his tribe, and of the worst type of 
fetishism. 

In general, modem man has looked at the shift from a “civilization of being” to 
a “civilization of becoming” as a real step forward." The valorization of the purely 
temporal aspect of reality in the name of history (hence historicism) has been one of 
the consequences of this shift. Once contact with the origins was lost the indefinite, 
senseless, and accelerated motion of what has rightly been called an “escape for¬ 
ward” in the name of evolution and progress has become the main feature of modern 
civilization. Quite frankly, the germs of this superstitious mythology applied to time 
may be found in Judeo-Christian eschatology and Messianism as well as in early 
Catholic apologetics, which valorized the “novelty” of the Christian revelation so 
much so that in Ambrose’s polemics against the Roman tradition we can find an 
early formulation of the theory of progress. The “rediscovery of man” promoted by 
the Renaissance represented a fertile habitat for the growth of those germs, up to the 
period of the Enlightenment and scientism. Ever since then the impressive develop¬ 
ment of the sciences of nature and technology, as well as of inventions, has acted 
like opium, distracting man’s mind and preventing him from perceiving the underly¬ 
ing and essential meaning of the entire movement: the abandonment of being and 
dissolution of any centrality in man, and his identification with the current of becom¬ 
ing, which has become stronger than him. And when the fantastic ideas of the coars¬ 
est kind of progressivism are at risk of being unmasked, the new religions of life and 
the “elan vital,” as well as “Faustian” activity and myth, make their appearance and 
become new intellectual “drugs” that ensure that the movement may not be inter¬ 
rupted but spurred on, so that it may acquire a meaning in itself, both for man and for 
existence in general. 

Again, the overthrow of the civilization of being is very evident. The center 
has shifted toward that evasive elemental power of the inferior region that in the 
world of Tradition had always been considered an inimical force. In this world, 
the task of anybody who yearned for a higher existence, as foreshadowed in the 
heroic and Olympian myth, consisted in subduing that force and in subjecting it to 
a form, a dominion, and an enlightenment of the soul. The human energies that 
were traditionally oriented in the direction of disidentification and of liberation, 
or which, at the very least, recognized the supreme dignity in this approach (so 
much so as to establish the system of hierarchical participations), after a sudden 
polar shift, have entered into the service of the forces of becoming by upholding, 

11 . J. Evola, L’nrco e In clavn, chap. 1. 


helping, exciting, and accelerating the rhythm of these forces in the modern world. 

On this basis, what we find in modern activity, instead of a path toward the 
superindividual (as in the case of the ancient possibilities of heroic asceticism), is a 
path to the subindividual; destructive incursions of the irrational and of the collective 
element into the already shaking structures of human personality are thus promoted 
and furthered. Nor in some sectors is there a lack of a certain “frantic” element 
analogous to that of ancient Dionysism—though on a lower and darker plane, since 
every reference to the sacred is absent and since the human circuits are the only ones 
to welcome and to absorb the evoked forces. The spiritual overcoming of time, 
achieved by rising up to the experience of what is eternal, is today replaced with its 
counterfeit, namely, the mechanical and illusory overcoming of time produced by 
the speed, immediacy, and simultaneity (“live,” the media would say) employed in 
modern technology. Those who see the part of themselves that is not contingent upon 
time are able to comprehend it with one glance as it presents itself the stream of 
becoming; just as one, who by climbing to the top of a tower, is able to gain an 
overall view and understand the unity of individual things that could otherwise only 
be perceived had they been experienced successively. Conversely, those who, with 
an opposite movement, immerse themselves in becoming and delude themselves 
about being able to possess it will only know the excitement, the vertigo, the convul¬ 
sive acceleration of speed, and the excesses resulting from sensation and agitation. 
This precipitation of those who “identify” themselves with becoming, who pick up 
speed, disrupt duration, destroy intervals, and abolish distances eventually flows into 
immediacy and thus into a real disintegration of inner unity. Being and stability are 
regarded by our contemporaries as akin to death; they cannot live unless they act, 
fret, or distract themselves with this or that. Their spirit (provided we can still talk 
about a spirit in their case) feeds only on sensations and on dynamism, thus becom¬ 
ing the vehicle for the incarnation of darker forces. 

Thus, the modem myths of action appear to be the forerunners of a last and 
decisive phase: after the disembodied and sidereal certainties of the superworld have 
faded into the distance like mountain peaks on a cloudy day; beyond the rationalist 
constructions and the technological devastations; beyond the impure fires of the col¬ 
lective vital substance; and beyond the fogs and the mirages of modem “culture,” a 
new era appears to be coming in which “Luciferian” and theophobic individualism 
will be definitively overcome and new unrestrainable powers will drag along in their 
wake this world of machines and these intoxicated and spent beings, who in the 
course of their downfall have erected titanic temples for them and have opened the 
ways of the earth. 

It is significant that the modem world shows a return of the themes that were 


324 


325 



GeIIEM MID FflEE Of THE (TIODEREl UJORLD 

proper to the ancient Southern gynaecocratic civilizations. Is it not true that social¬ 
ism and communism are materialized and technological revivals of the ancient tellu¬ 
ric, Southern principle of equality and promiscuity of all beings in Mother Earth? In 
the modern world the predominant ideal of virility has been reduced to merely the 
physical and phallic components, just like in the Aphrodistic gynaecocracy. The ple¬ 
beian feeling of the Motherland that triumphed with the French Revolution and was 
developed by nationalistic ideologies as the mysticism of the common folk and the 
sacred and omnipotent Motherland is nothing less than the revival of a fonn of femi¬ 
nine totemism. In the democratic regimes, the fact that kings and the heads of state 
lack any real autonomy bears witness to the loss of the absolute principle of fatherly 
sovereignty and the return of those who have in the Mother (that is, in the substance 
of the demos) the source of their being. Hetaerism and Amazonism today are also 
present in new forms, such as the disintegration of the family, modern sensuality, 
and the incessant and turbid quest for women and immediate sexual gratification, as 
well as in the masculinization of the woman, her emancipation, and her standing 
above men who have become enslaved to their senses or turned into beasts of bur¬ 
den. Concerning Dionysus’ mask, I have previously identified it with ceaseless ac¬ 
tivity and with the philosophy of becoming; and so today we witness a revival, 
mutatis mutandis, of the same civilization of decadence that appeared in the ancient 
Mediterranean world—though in its lowest forms. What is lacking, in fact, is a sense 
of the sacred, as well as any equivalent of the chaste and calm Demetrian possibil¬ 
ity. Rather than the survival of the positive religion that became prominent in the 
West, today the symptoms are rather the dark evocations proper to the various 
mediumistic, spiritualistic, and neotheosophical cunents that emphasize the subcon¬ 
scious, and are characterized by a pantheistic and materialistic mysticism; these cur¬ 
rents proliferate and grow in a way that is almost epidemic wherever (for example, 
in Anglo-Saxon countries) the materialization of the virile type and ordinary exist¬ 
ence has reached its peak and wherever Protestantism has secularized and impover¬ 
ished the religious ideal. 12 Thus, the parallel is almost complete and the cycle is 
about to close. 


12. In my Maschera e voltodello spiritualismo contemporaneo (Bari, 1949) and especially in the last chapter 
of Cava Ic a re la tigre I have discussed the meaning of the most recent kinds of “spiritualism.” 


326 


35 



The Regression of the Castes 


A s my intent was to offer a bird’s-eye view of history, in the previous pages I 
. have presented all the elements necessary to formulate an objective law at 
work in the various stages of the process of decadence, that is, the law of the regres¬ 
sion of the castes. 1 A progressive shift of power and type of civilization has occurred 
from one caste to the next since prehistoric times (from sacred leaders, to a warrior 
aristocracy, to the merchants, and finally, to the serfs); these castes in traditional 
civilizations corresponded to the qualitative differentiation of the main human possi¬ 
bilities. In the face of this general movement anything concerning the various con¬ 
flicts among peoples, the life of nations, or other historical accidents plays only a 
secondary and contingent role. 

I have already discussed the dawn of the age of the first caste. In the West, the 
representatives of the divine royalty and the leaders who embody the two powers 
(spiritual and temporal), in what I have called “spiritual virility” and “Olympian 
sovereignty,” belong to a very distant and almost mythical past. We have seen how, 
through the gradual deterioration of the Light of the North, the process of decadence 
has unfolded; in the Ghibelline ideal of the Holy Roman Empire I have identified the 
last echo of the highest tradition. 

Once the apex disappeared, authority descended to the level immediately be¬ 
low, that is, to the caste of the warriors. The stage was then set for monarchs who 
were mere military leaders, lords of temporal justice and, in more recent times, po¬ 
litically absolute sovereigns. In other words, regality of blood replaced regality of 


1. The idea of regression of the castes, which 1 had previously referred to in my pamphlet Imperialismo 
Pagano (Rome, 1927), was detailed by V. Vczzani and by R. Guenon in his Autorite spirituelle etpouvoir 
temporel; finally, it has been expounded in an independent fashion by H. Berls in Die Henuifkunst des 
fun ften Standcs (Karlsruhe, 1931). This idea lias an analogical correspondence with (lie traditional doc¬ 
trine of the four ages, since each of the four traditional castes embodies the values that have predominated 
during the quadripartite process of regression. 


327 



Gedew ADD Face of tae IHoderu UJorld 


Tae Regression of the Castes 


the spirit. In a few instances it is still possible to find the idea of “divine right,” but 
only as a formula lacking a real content. We find such rulers in antiquity behind 
institutions that retained the traits of the ancient sacred regime only in a formal way. 
In any event in the West, with the dissolution of the medieval ecumene, the passage 
into the second phase became all-encompassing and definitive. During this stage, 
the tides cementing the state no longer had a religious character, but only a warrior 
one; it meant loyalty, faithfulness, honor. This was essentially the age and the cycle 
of the great European monarchies. 

Then a second collapse occurred as the aristocracies began to fall into decay 
and the monarchies to shake at the foundations; through revolutions and constitu¬ 
tions they became useless institutions subject to the “will of the nation,” and some¬ 
times they were even ousted by different regimes. The principle characterizing this 
state of affairs was: “The king reigns but he does not rule.” Together with parliamen¬ 
tary republics the formation of the capitalist oligarchies revealed the shift of power 
from the second caste (the warrior) to the modern equivalent of the third caste (the 
mercantile class). The kings of the coal, oil, and iron industries replace the previous 
kings of blood and of spirit. Antiquity, too, sometimes knew this phenomenon in 
sporadic fonns; in Rome and in Greece the “aristocracy of wealth” repeatedly forced 
the hand of the hierarchical structure by pursuing aristocratic positions, undermining 
sacred laws and traditional institutions, and infiltrating the militia, priesthood, or 
consulship. In later times what occumed was the rebellion of the communes and the 
rise of the various medieval formations of mercantile power. The solemn proclama¬ 
tion of the “rights of the Third Estate” in France represented the decisive stage, 
followed by the varieties of “bourgeois revolution” of the third caste, which em¬ 
ployed liberal and democratic ideologies for its own purposes. Correspondingly, this 
;ra was characterized by the theory of the social contract. At this time the social 
pond was no longer a tides of a warrior type based on relationships of faithfulness 
and honor. Instead, it took on a utilitarian and economic character; it consisted of an 
agreement based on personal convenience and on material interest that only a mer¬ 
chant could have conceived. Gold became a means and a powerful tool; those who 
knew how to acquire it and to multiply it (capitalism, high finance, industrial trusts), 
behind the appearances of democracy, virtually controlled political power and the 
instruments employed in the art of opinion making. Aristocracy gave way to plutoc¬ 
racy, the warrior, to the banker and industrialist. The economy triumphed on all 
fronts. Trafficking with money and charging interest, activities previously confined 
to the ghettos, invaded the new civilization. According to the expression of W. Sombart, 
in the promised land of Protestant puritanism, Americanism, capitalism, and the “dis¬ 
tilled Jewish spirit coexist. It is natural that given these congenial premises, the 


modern representatives of secularized Judaism saw the ways to achieve world domi¬ 
nation open up before them. In this regard, Karl Marx wrote: 

What are the mundane principles of Judaism? Practical necessity and 
the pursuit of one’s own advantage. What is its earthly god? Money. 

The Jew has emancipated himself in a typically Jewish fashion not only 
in that he has taken control of the power of money, but also in that 
through him, money has become a world power and the practical Jew¬ 
ish spirit has become the spirit of the Christian people. The Jews have 
emancipated themselves insofar as the Christians have become Jews. 

The god of the Jews has become secularized and has become the god of 
the earth. The exchange is the true god of the Jews . 2 

In reality, the codification of the traffic with gold as a loan charged with interest, to 
which the Jews had been previously devoted since they had no other means through 
which they could affirm themselves, may be said to be the very foundation of the 
acceptance of the aberrant development of all that is banking, high finance, and pure 
economy, which are spreading like a cancer in the modern world. This is the funda¬ 
mental time in the “age of the merchants.” 

Finally, the crisis of bourgeois society, class smuggle, the proletarian revolt against 
capitalism, the manifesto promulgated at the “Third International” (or Comintern) in 
1919, and the correlative organization of the groups and the masses in the cadres 
proper to a “socialist civilization of labor”—all these bear witness to the third col 
lapse, in which power tends to pass into the hands of the lowest of the traditiona 
castes, the caste of the beasts of burden and the standardized individuals. The result 
of this transfer of power was a reduction of horizon and value to the plane of matter, 
the machine, and the reign of quantity. The prelude to this was the Russian Revolu¬ 
tion. Tlius, the new ideal became the “proletarian” ideal of a universal and commu¬ 
nist civilization. 3 

We may compare the abovementioned phenomenon of the awakening and gush¬ 
ing forth of elemental subhuman forces within the structures of the modem world to 
a person who can no longer endure the tension of the spirit (first caste), and eventu¬ 
ally not even the tension of the will as a free force that animates the body (warrior 
caste), and who thus gives in to the subpersonal forces of the organic system and all 

2. Karl Marx, Deutsche-fra nzosische fahrbiicher (Paris, 1844), 209-12. 

3, D. Merczhkovsky, Les Mystbres del’Orient (24): “The word ‘proletarian’ comes from Latin proles, which 
means posterity, generation. Proletarians ‘produce’ and generate with their bodies, but are spiritual eu¬ 
nuchs. They are not men or women, but anonymous ‘comrades? impersonal ants which are pan of the 
human anthill.’’ 


328 


329 



Gemii m Face of the Modem UJorld 


The Regression of the Castes 


of a sudden reacts almost magnetically under the impulse of another life that re¬ 
places his own. The ideas and the passions of the demos soon escape men's control 
and they begin to act as if they had acquired an autonomous and dreadful life of their 
own. These passions pit nations and collectivities against each other and result in 
unprecedented conflicts and crises. At the end of the process, once the total collapse 
has occurred, there awaits an international system under the brutal symbols of the 
hammer and the sickle. 

Such are the horizons facing the contemporary world. Just as it is only by adher¬ 
ing to free activity that man can truly be free and realize his own self, likewise, by 
focusing on practical and utilitarian goals, economic achievements, and whatever 
was once the exclusive domain of the inferior castes man abdicates, disintegrates, 
loses his center, and opens himself up to infernal forces of which he is destined to 
become the unwilling and unconscious instrument. Moreover, contemporary society 
looks like an organism that has shifted from a human to a subhuman type, in which 
every activity and reaction is determined by the needs and the dictates of purely 
physical life. Man’s dominating principles are those typical of the material part of 
traditional hierarchies: gold and work. This is how things are today; these two ele¬ 
ments, almost without exception, affect every possibility of existence and give shape 
to the ideologies and myths that clearly testify to the gravity of the modem perver¬ 
sion of ail values. 

Not only does the quadripartite regression have a sociopolitical scope, but it also 
invests every domain of civilization. In architecture the regression is symbolized by 
the shift from the temple (first caste) as the dominant building, to the fortress and 
castle (caste of the warriors), to the city-state surrounded by protecting walls (age of 
the merchants), to the factoiy, and finally to the rational and dull buildings that are 
the hives of mass-man. The family, which in the origins had a sacred foundation, 
shifted to an authoritarian model (patria potestas in a mere juridical sense), then to a 
bourgeois and conventional one, until it will finally dissolve when the party, the 
people, and society will supersede it in importance and dignity. The notion of war 
underwent analogous phases: from the doctrine of the “sacred war” and of the mors 
triumphalis a shift occurred to war waged in the name of the right and of the honor of 
one’s lord (warrior caste); in the third stage conflicts are brought about by national 
ambitions that are contingent upon the plans and the interests of a supremacist 
economy and industry (caste of the merchants); finally there arose the communist 
theory according to which war among nations is just a bourgeois residue, since the 
only just war is the world revolution of the proletarian class waged against the capi¬ 
talist and the so-called imperialist world (caste of the serfs). In the aesthetic dimen¬ 
sion a shift occurred from a symbolic, sacred art closely related to the possibilities of 


predicting future events and magic (first caste), to the predominance of epic art and 
poems (caste of the warriors); this was followed by a shift to a romantic, conven¬ 
tional, sentimentalist, erotic, and psychological art that is produced for the consump¬ 
tion of the bourgeois class, until finally, new “social” or “socially involved” views of 
art begin to emerge that advocate an art for the use and consumption of the masses. 
The traditional world knew the superindividual unity characterizing the orders: in 
the West first came ascetic, monastic orders; these were followed by knightly orders 
(caste of the warriors), which in turn were followed by the unity sworn to in Masonic 
lodges, which worked hard to prepare the revolution of the Third Estate and the 
advent of democracy. Finally there came the network of revolutionary and activist 
cadres of the Communist International (last caste), bent on the destruction of the 
previous sociopolitical order. 

It is on the plane of ethics that the process of degradation is particularly visible. 
While the first age was characterized by the ideal of “spiritual virility,” initiation, 
and an ethics aimed at overcoming all human bonds; and while the age of the war¬ 
riors was characterized by the ideal of heroism, victory, and lordship, as well as by 
the aristocratic ethics of honor, faithfulness, and chivalry, during the age of the mer¬ 
chants the predominant ideals were of pure economics, profit, prosperity, and of 
science as an instrument of a technical and industrial progress that propels produc¬ 
tion and new profits in a “consumer society.” Finally, the advent of the serfs corre¬ 
sponds to the elevation of the slave’s principle— work —to the status of a religion. It 
is the hatred harbored by the slave that sadistically proclaims: “If anyone will not 
work, neither let him eat” (2 Thess. 3:10). The slave’s self-congratulating stupidity 
creates sacred incenses with the exhalations of human sweat, hence expressions 
such as “Work ennobles man”; “The religion of work”; and “Work as a social and 
ethical duty.” We have previously learned that the ancient world despised work only 
because it knew action; the opposition of action to work as an opposition between 
the spiritual, pure, and free pole, and the material, impure pole impregnated only 
with human possibilities, was at the basis of that contempt. The loss of the sense of 
this opposition, and the animal-like subordination of the former to the latter, charac¬ 
terizes the last ages. And where in ancient times every work, through an inner trans¬ 
figuration owing to its purity and its meaning as an “offering” oriented upwards 
could redeem itself until it became a symbol of action, now, following an upheaval 
in the opposite direction (which can be observed during the age of the serfs), every 
residue of action tends to be degraded to the form of work. The degeneration of the 
ancient aristocratic and sacred ethics into the modem plebeian and materialistic 
morality is expressively characterized by such a shift from the plane of action to 
the plane of work. Superior men who lived in a not so distant past, either acted or 


330 


331 



GENESIS flflD FflCC OF TOE HlODERIl UJORLD 


Toe Regression of toe Castes 


directed actions. Modem man works. 4 The only real difference today is that which 
exists between the various kinds of work; there are “intellectual” workers and those 
who use their limbs and machines. In any event, the notion of “action” is dying out in 
the modern world, together with that of “absolute personality.” Moreover, among all 
the commissioned arts, antiquity regarded as most disgraceful those devoted to the 
pursuit of pleasure (minimaeque artes eas probandae, quae ministrae sunt 
voluptatum), 5 this, after all, is precisely the kind of work respected the most in this 
day and age. Beginning with the scientist, technician, and politician, and with the 
rationalized system of productive organization, “work” supposedly leads to the real¬ 
ization of an ideal more fitting for a human animal: an easier life that is more enjoy¬ 
able and safer with the maximization of one’s well-being and physical comfort. The 
contemporary breed of artists and of “creative minds” of the bourgeoisie is the equiva¬ 
lent of that class of “luxury servants” that catered to the pleasure and distractions of 
the Roman patriciate and later on, of the medieval feudal lords. 

Then again, while the themes proper to this degradation find their most charac¬ 
teristic expressions on the social plane and in contemporary life, they do not fail to 
make an appearance on the ideal and speculative plane. It was precisely during the 
age of humanism that the antitraditional and plebeian theme emerged in the views 
of Giordano Bruno who, by inverting traditional values, extolled the age of human 
effort and work over and against the Golden Age (of which he knew absolutely 
nothing) in a masochistic fashion and with authentic stupidity. Bruno called “divine” 
the brutish drive of human need, since such a drive is responsible for producing 
“increasingly wonderful arts and inventions,” for removing mankind further from 
that Golden Age that he regarded as animalistic and lazy, and for drawing human 
beings closer to God, 6 In all this we find an anticipation of those ideologies that, by 
virtue of being significantly connected to the age of the French Revolution, regarded 
work as the main element of the social myth and revived the messianic theme in 
tenns of work and machines, all the while singing the praises of progress. Moreover, 
modern man, whether consciously or unconsciously, began to apply to the universe 
and project on an ideal plane the experiences that he nurtured in the workshops and 
factories and by which the soul became a product. 

Bergson, who exalted the elan vital, is the one who drew the analogy as only a 
modem could between technical productive activity inspired by a mere practical 

4. O. Spengler, The Decline of (he West (1918; London, 1926), vol. 1. The term “action” is here used as 
synonymous with a spiritual and disinterested activity; thus it may be applied to contemplation, which in 
the classical idea was often regarded as the most pure form of activity; it had its object and goal in itself 
and did not need “anything else” in order to be implemented. 

5. Cicero, De officiis, 1.42. 

6. Giordano Bruno, Spaccio della Bestia trionfanle, dialogue 3. 


principle and the ways of intelligence itself. Having covered with ridicule the an¬ 
cient “inert” ideal of knowledge as contemplation, 

The entire effort of modern epistemology in its most radical trajecto¬ 
ries consists in assimilating knowledge to productive work, according 
to the postulates: “To know is to do” and “One can only really know 
what one does .” 7 

Verum et factum convertuntur. And since according to the unrealism typical of these 
currents, (a)“ to be” means “to know”; (b) the spirit is identified with the idea; and (c) 
the productive and immanent knowing process is identified with the process of real¬ 
ity, the way of the fourth caste is reflected in the highest regions and posits itself as 
their foundational “truth.” Likewise, there is an activism on the plane of philosophi¬ 
cal theories that appears to be in agreement with the world created by the advent of 
the last caste and its “civilization of work.” 

Generally speaking, this advent is reflected in the abovementioned modem ide¬ 
ologies of “progress” and “evolution,” which have distorted with a “scientific” irre¬ 
sponsibility any superior vision of history, promoted the definitive abandonment of 
traditional truths, and created the most specious alibis for the justification and glori¬ 
fication of modern man. The myth of evolutionism is nothing else but the profession 
of faith of the upstart. If in recent times the West does not believe in a transcendent 
origin but rather an origin “from below”; and if the West no longer believes in the 
nobility of the origins but in the notion that civilization arises out of barbarism, reli¬ 
gion from superstition, man from animal (Darwin), thought from matter, and every 
spiritual form from the “sublimation” or transposition of the stuff that originates the 
instinct, libido, and complexes of the “collective unconscious” (Freud, Jung), and so 
on—we can see in all this not so much the result of a deviated quest, but rather, and 
above all, an alibi, or something that a civilization created by both lower beings and 
the revolution of the serfs and pariahs against the ancient aristocratic society neces¬ 
sarily had to believe in and wish to be true. There is not a dimension in which, in 
one form or another, the evolutionary myth has not succeeded in infiltrating with 
destructive consequences; the results have been the overthrow of every value, the 
suppression of all sense of truth, the elaboration and connecting together (as in an 
unbreakable magical circle) of the world inhabited by a deconsecrated and deluded 
mankind. In agreement with historicism, so-called post-Hegelian Idealism came to 
identify the essence of the “Absolute Spirit” with its “becoming” and its “self¬ 
creation”—this Spirit was no longer conceived as a Being that is, that dominates, 

7. A. Tilgher, Homo Faber , 120-21. 


332 


333 



Gehesis mid Face of the ITIoderei World 


The Regression of the (ms 


and that possesses itself; the self-made man has almost become the new metaphysical 
model. 

It is not easy to separate the process of regression along the way of gold (age of 
merchants) from the regression along the way of work (age of serfs), since these 
ways are interdependent. For all practical purposes, just as today work as a universal 
duty is no longer perceived as a repugnant, absurd, and unnatural value, likewise, to 
be paid does not seem repugnant but on the contrary, it seems very natural. Money, 
which no longer “bums” the hands it touches, has established an invisible bond of 
slavery that is worse and more depraved than that which the high spiritual “stature” 
of lords and conquerors used to retain and justify. 

Just as any fonn of action tends to become yet another form of work, so is it 
always associated with payment. And while on the one hand action reduced to work 
is judged by its efficiency in contemporary societies, just as man is valued by his 
practical success and by his profit; and while, as someone has remarked, Calvin 
acted as a pimp by seeing that profit and wealth were shrouded in the mysticism of a 
divine election—on the other hand, the specter of hunger and unemployment lurks 
upon these new slaves as a more fearful threat than the threat of the whip in ancient 
times. 

In any event, it is possible to distinguish a general phase in which the yearning 
for profit displayed by single individuals who pursue wealth and power is the central 
motif (the phase that corresponds to the advent of the third caste) from a further 
phase that is still unfolding, characterized by a sovereign economy that has become 
almost independent or collectivized (the advent of the last caste). 

In this regard, it is interesting to note that the regression of the principle of “ac¬ 
tion to the form proper to the inferior castes (work, production) is often accompa¬ 
nied by an analogous regression with regard to the principle of “asceticism.” What 
arises is almost a new asceticism of gold and work, because as it is exemplified by 
representative figures of this phase, to work and amass a fortune become things that 
are yearned for and loved for their own sake, as if they were a vocation. Thus we 
often see, especially in America, powerful capitalists who enjoy their wealth less 
than the last of their employees; rather than owning riches and being free from them 
and thus employing them to fund forms of magnificence, quality, and sensibility for 
various precious and privileged spectacles (as was the case in ancient aristocracies), 
these people appear to be merely the managers of their fortunes. Rich though they 
may be, they pursue an increasing number of activities; it is almost as if they were 
impersonal and ascetical instruments whose activity is devoted to gathering, multi¬ 
plying, and casting into ever wider nets (that sometimes affect the lives of millions of 
people and the destinies of entire nations) the faceless forces of money and of pro¬ 


duction. 8 Fiat productio, pereat homo, Sombart correctly remarked when noticing 
that the spiritual destruction and emptiness that man has created around himself, 
after he became “homo economic us” and a great capitalist entrepreneur, force him 
to turn his activity (profit, business, prosperity) into an end in itself, to love it and will 
it for its own sake lest he fall victim to the vertigo of the abyss and the horror of a life 
that is totally meaningless. 9 

Even the relationship of the modem economy to machines is significant with 
regard to the arousal of forces that suipass the plans of those who initially evoked 
them and carry everything along with them. Once all interest for anything superior 
and transcendent was either lost or laughed at, the only reference point remaining 
was man’s need, in a purely material and animal sense. Moreover, the traditional 
principle of the limitation of one’s need within the context of a normal economy (a 
balanced economy based on consumption) was replaced with the principle of accep¬ 
tance and multiplication of need, which paralleled the so-called Industrial Revolu¬ 
tion and the advent of the age of machines. Technological innovations have auto¬ 
matically led mankind from production to overproduction. After the “activist” frenzy 
was awoken and the frantic circulation of capital—which is multiplied through pro¬ 
duction in order to be put again in circulation through further productive investments— 
was set in motion, mankind has finally arrived at a point where the relationship 
between need and machine (or work) have been totally reversed; it is no longer need 
that requires mechanical work, but mechanical work (or production) that generates 
new needs. In a regime of superproduction, in order for all the products to be sold it 
is necessary that the needs of single individuals, far from being reduced, be main¬ 
tained and even multiplied so that consumption may increase and the mechanism be 
kept running in order to avoid the fatal congestion that would bring about one of the 
following two consequences: either war, understood as the means for a violent affir¬ 
mation by a greater economic and productive power that claims not to have “enough 
space,” or unemployment (industrial shutdowns as a response to the crisis on the job 
market and in consumerism) with its ensuing crises and social tensions precipitating 
the insurrection of the Fourth Estate. 

As a fire starts another fire until an entire area goes up in flames, this is how the 

8. See M. Weber, Gesammeltc Aufsatze zur Religion imd Soziologie (Tubingen, 1924), vol. 3, in which the 
Protestant roots of such an “asceticar version of capitalism are discussed. Originally there was a separa¬ 
tion between earning as a “vocation” and the enjoyment of riches, the latter being looked down upon as a 
sinful element of the deification and pride of the human creature. Naturally, in tire course of history the 
original religious considerations were eliminated; today we only find purely secular and unscrupulous 
forms. [Evola is referring to Weber’s The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism.] 

9. W. Sombart, 11 borghese, Italian trans. from the French (Paris, 1926), 204-22; 400-409. 


334 


335 



Genesis mid Face of the Modem World 


The Regression of the Castes 


economy has affected the inner essence of modem man through the world that he 
himself created. This present “civilization,” starting from Western hotbeds, has ex¬ 
tended the contagion to every land that was still healthy and has brought to all strata 
of society and all races the following “gifts”: restlessness, dissatisfaction, resent¬ 
ment, the need to go further and faster, and the inability to possess one’s life in 
simplicity, independence, and balance. Modem civilization has pushed man onward; 
it has generated in him the need for an increasingly greater number of things; it has 
made him more and more insufficient to himself and powerless. Thus, every new 
invention and technological discovery, rather than a conquest, really represents a 
defeat and a new whiplash in an ever faster race blindly taking place within a system 
of conditionings that are increasingly serious and irreversible and that for the most 
part go unnoticed. This is how the various paths converge: technological civilization, 
the dominant role of the economy, and the civilization of production and consump¬ 
tion all complement the exaltation of becoming and progress; in other words, they 
contribute to the manifestation of the “demonic” element in the modern world. 10 

Regarding the degenerated forms of asceticism, I would like to point out the 
spirit of a phenomenon that is more properly connected to the plane of “work” (that 
is, of the fourth caste). The modem world knows a sublimated version of work in 
which the latter becomes “disinterested,” disjoined from the economic factor and 
from the idea of a practical or productive goal and takes an almost ascetic form; I am 
talking about sport. Sport is a way of working in which the productive objective no 
longer matters; thus, sport is willed for its own sake as mere activity. Someone has 
rightly pointed out that spoit is the “blue collar” religion. 11 Sport is a typical counter¬ 
feit of action in the traditional sense of the word. A pointless activity, it is neverthe¬ 
less still characterized by the same triviality of work and belongs to the same physi¬ 
cal and lightless group of activities that are pursued at the various crossroads in 
which plebeian contamination occurs. Although through the practice of sport it is 
possible to achieve a temporary evocation of deep forces, what this amounts to is the 
enjoyment of sensations and a sense of vertigo and at most, the excitement derived 
from directing one’s energies and winning a competition—without any higher and 
transfiguring reference, any sense of “sacrifice” or deindividualizing offering being 
present. Physical individuality is cherished and strengthened by sport; thus the chain 
is confirmed and every residue of subtler sensibi lity is suffocated. The human being, 


instead of growing into an organic being, tends to be reduced to a bundle of reflexes, 
and almost to a mechanism. It is also very significant that the lower strata of society 
are the ones that show more enthusiasm for sports, displaying their enthusiasm in 
great collective forms. Sport may be identified as one of the forewarning signs of 
that type of society represented by Chigalev in Dostoyevsky’s The Obsessed; after 
the required time has elapsed for a methodical and reasoned education aimed at 
extirpating the evil represented by the “I” and by free will, and no longer realizing 
they are slaves, all the Chigalevs will return to experience the innocence and the 
happiness of a new Eden. This “Eden” differs from the biblical one only because 
work will be the dominating universal law. Work as sport and sport as work in a 
world that has lost the sense of historical cycles, as well as the sense of true person¬ 
ality, would probably be the best way to implement such a messianic ideal. Thus, it is 
not a coincidence that in several societies, whether spontaneously or thanks to the 
state, great sports organizations have arisen as the appendices of various classes of 
workers, and vice versa. 


10. The word‘‘demonic’ 1 is obviously not to be understood in the Christian sense of the word. The expression 

demonic people found in the BhagavadgTtci applies very much to our contemporaries: “Thus they are 
beset with innumerable cares which last long, all their life, until death. Their highest aim is sensual 
enjoyment, and they firmly think that this is all” (16.11). 

11. A. Tilgher, Homo Faber, 162. 


336 


337 



DflTionRLhin id CoLLEcnvism 


36 


Nationalism and Collectivism 


I f the apex of traditional civilizations consisted in the principle of universalism, 
then modem civilization is essentially under the aegis of collectivism. The col¬ 
lective is to the universal what “matter” is to “form.” The first step of what in a tradi¬ 
tional sense has always been regarded as “culture” consists in the differentiation of 
the promiscuous substance of the collective and in the affirmation of personal beings 
Jirough adherence to superior principles and interests. When the single individual 
las succeeded in giving a law and a form to his own nature and thus in belonging to 
nimself rather than depending on the merely physical part of his being, then the pre¬ 
liminary condition for a superior order—in which the personality is not abolished but 
integrated—is already present; such is the order of traditional “participations” in which 
every individual, function, and caste acquire their right place and reason for being 
through the acknowledgment of what is superior to them and their organic connec¬ 
tion with it. At best, the universal is achieved in the sense of the crowning part of a 
building, the strong foundations of which consist of both the various differentiated 
and formed personalities, each one faithful to its own function, and in partial organ¬ 
isms or units endowed with corresponding laws and rights that do not contradict each 
other but rather coordinate and complement each other through a common spiritual¬ 
ity and a common active propensity to a superindividual commitment. 

From what has been said previously it is possible to see that in modem society 
the opposite direction is prevailing, that is, the direction of regress toward the collec¬ 
tive rather than progress toward the universal, with the single individual becoming 
increasingly unable to have a meaning other than as a function of something in which 
he ceases to have a personality. This becomes increasingly evident as the world of 
the Fourth Estate approaches. Thus, modem nationalism may be regarded as at best 
a transition phase. 

It is necessary to distinguish between nationality and nationalism. The Middle 
Ages knew nationalities but not nationalisms. Nationality is a natural factor that 
encompasses a certa in group of common elementary characteristics that are retained 


both in the hierarchical differentiation and in the hierarchical participation, which 
they do not oppose. Therefore, during the Middle Ages, castes, social bodies, and 
orders were articulated within various nationalities, and while the types of the war¬ 
rior, noble, merchant, and artisan conformed to the characteristics of this or of that 
nation, these articulations represented at the same time wider, international units. 
Hence, the possibility for the members of the same caste who came from different 
nations to understand each other better than the members of different castes within 
the same nation. 

Modem nationalism represents, with regard to this, a movement in the opposite 
direction. Modem nationalism is not based on a natural unity, but on an artificial and 
centralizing one. The need for this type of unity was increasingly felt at the same 
time as the natural and healthy sense of nationality was lost and as individuals ap¬ 
proached the state of pure quantity, of being merely the masses, after every authen¬ 
tic tradition and qualitative articulation was destroyed. Nationalism acts upon these 
masses through myths and suggestions that are likely to galvanize them, awaken 
elementary instincts in them, flatter them with the perspectives and fancies of su¬ 
premacy, exclusivism, and power. Regardless of its myths, the substance of modem 
nationalism is not an ethnos but a demos, and its prototype always remains the ple¬ 
beian one produced by the French Revolution. 

This is why nationalism has a double face. It accentuates and elevates to the 
state of absolute value a particularistic principle; therefore, the possibilities of mu¬ 
tual understanding and cooperation between nations are reduced to a bare mini¬ 
mum, without even considering the forms of leveling guaranteed by modem civiliza¬ 
tion. What seems to continue here is the same tendency through which the arising ol 
national states corresponded to the disintegration of the European ecumene. It is 
well known that in Europe during the nineteenth century, nationalism was synony¬ 
mous with revolution and acted in the precise sense of a dissolution of the surviving 
supemational organisms and a weakening of the political principle of “legitimate' 
sovereignty in the traditional sense of the word. Yet, when considering the relation¬ 
ships between the whole and the single individual as personality, what emerges in 
nationalism is an opposite aspect, namely, the cumulative and collectivizing ele¬ 
ment. In the context of modem nationalism what emerges is the previously men¬ 
tioned inversion; the nation, the homeland, becomes the primary element in terms of 
being a self-subsisting entity that requires from the individual belonging to it an 
unconditional dedication, as if it were a moral and not merely a natural and “politi¬ 
cal” entity. Even culture stops being the support for the formation and elevation of 
the person and becomes essentially relevant only by virtue of its national character. 
Thus in the most radical forms of nationalism, the liberal ideal and the ideal of “neu¬ 
tral culture” undergo a crisis and are regarded with suspicion, though from the oppo- 


338 


339 



tasis add Face of the Modem World 


Hmionnusm add (oLLtnivism 


site perspective to the one in which liberalism and the neutral, secular, and apolitical 
culture appeared as a degeneration or as a crumbling in comparison to previous 
organic civilizations. 

Even when nationalism speaks of “tradition,” it has nothing to do with what used 
to go by that name in ancient civilizations; it is rather a myth or fictitious continuity 
based on a minimum common denominator that consists in the mere belonging to a 
given group. Through the concept of “tradition,” nationalism aims at consolidating a 
collective dimension by placing behind the individual the mythical, deified, and col¬ 
lectivized unity of all those who preceded him. In this sense, Chesterton was right to 
call this type of tradition “the democracy of the dead.” Here the dimension of tran¬ 
scendence, or of what is superior to history, is totally lacking. 

According to these aspects, it can be said that modern nationalism on the one 
hand confirms the renunciation of the pursuit of the upwards-oriented direction and 
the unification through what is supernatural and potentially universal, while on the 
other hand it distinguishes itself only by virtue of a mere difference of degree from 
the anonymity proper to the ideal of the Fourth Estate with its “Internationals,” bent, 
as a matter of principle, on perverting every notion of homeland and of the national 
state. In reality, wherever the people have become sovereign and the king or the 
leader is no longer considered as being “from above,” or to be ruling “by God’s 
grace,” but instead “by the will of the nation” (even where the expression “to rule by 
God’s grace” has been preserved, it amounts to an empty formula)—it is precisely at 
this point that the abyss that separates a political organism of a traditional type from 
communism is virtually overcome—the fracture has occurred, all the values have 
shitted and been turned upside down; at this point one can only wait for the final 
stage to be ushered in. Thus, it is more than for mere tactical purposes that the lead¬ 
ers of world subversion in the last form, as it has been embodied in Soviet commu¬ 
nism, have as their main goal the excitement, nourishing, and supporting of national¬ 
ism even where nationalism, by virtue of being anticommunist, should at least in 
principle turn against them. They see far away, just like those who employed nation¬ 
alism for their own purposes during the early revolution (i.e., liberalism) when they 
said “nation” but really meant “antitradition” or the denial of the principle of true 
sovereignty. They recognize the collective potential of nationalism, which beyond 
contingent antitheses will finally dispose of the organisms that it controls. 

Hence, the difference in degree between nationalism and the tendencies of a 
democratic and communitarian character that oppose the forces of particularism and 
spirit of division inherent in nationalism. In these tendencies the regressive phenom¬ 
enon that is at the foundation of modem nationalism is also visible; at work in it is the 
impulse toward a wider agglomerate, leveled on a global scale. As Julian Benda 
said, the last perspective is that humanity, and not just a fraction of it, will take itself 


as the object of its cult. There is today a trend toward universal brotherhood; this 
brotherhood, far from abolishing the nationalist spirit and its particularisms and pride, 
will eventually become its supreme form, as the nation will be called Man and God 
will be regarded either as an enemy 1 or as an “inoperative fiction.” When mankind 
becomes unified in an immense enterprise and accustomed to organized production, 
technology, division of labor, and “prosperity,” despising any free activity oriented 
to transcendence, it will achieve what in similar currents is conceived as the ultimate 
goal of the true civilizing effort, 2 

One final consideration concerning modem nationalism: while on the one hand 
it corresponds to a construction and an artificial entity, on the other hand, through the 
power of the myths and the confusing ideas that are evoked in order to hold together 
and galvanize a given human group, this entity remains open to influences that make 
it act according to the general plan of subversion. Modern nationalisms, with their 
intransigence, blind egoism and crude will to power, their antagonisms, social unrest 
and the wars they have generated have truly been the instruments for the completion 
of a destructive process: the shift from the age of the Third Estate to that of the 
Fourth Estate; in so doing they have dug their own graves. 

Europe had the chance, if not to stop, at least to contain the disaggregative 
process in a rather wide geopolitical area after the fall of Napoleon who, though he 
revived the imperial symbol and yearned for a Roman consecration, still remained 
“the son of the Great Revolution,” the virus of which he helped to spread into the 
remaining states of traditional and aristocratic Europe as a result of the upheavals 
brought about by his victorious campaigns. Through the Holy Alliance it would have 
been possible to create a dam against the fate of the last times. Metternich may 
rightly be considered the last great European. Nobody was able to see like him with 
the same far-sighted lucidity and the same overall view the interplay of subversive 
forces as well as the only way immediately to neutralize them. 

Metternich saw all the most essential points: that revolutions are not spontane¬ 
ous outbursts or mass phenomena, but rather artificial phenomena that are provoked 
by forces that have the same function in the healthy body of people and states that 
bacteria have in the generation of diseases in the human body; that nationalism, as it 
emerged in his own day and age, was only the mask of revolution; that revolution 
was essentially an international event and that the individual revolutionary phenom¬ 
ena are only localized and partial manifestations of the same subversive current of 
global proportions. Metternich also saw very clearly the concatenation of the various 
degrees of revolution; liberalism and constitutionalism unavoidably pave the way for 

1. Proudhon had already declared that the true remedy does not consist in identifying mankind with God, but 
in proving that God, if he exists, is mankind’s sworn enemy. 

2. J, Benda, The Treason of the Clerics. 


340 


341 


Genesis and Free of the (Hoderu World 


rifliionflusm m ConEcnvism 


democracy, which in turn paves the way for socialism, which in turn paves the way 
for radicalism and finally for communism—the entire liberal revolution of the Third 
Estate only being instrumental in preparing the way for the revolution of the Fourth 
Estate, which is destined to inexorably remove the representatives of the former and 
their world as soon as they have completed their assignment as the avant-garde in 
charge of opening a breach. This is why Mettemich saw folly in coming to terms with 
subversion: if you give it a hand it will soon take the arm and the rest of the body as 
well. Having understood the revolutionary phenomenon in its unity and essence, 
Mettemich indicated the only possible antidote: a similar supemational front of all 
the traditional states and the establishment of a defensive and offensive league of all 
the monarchs of divine right. This is what his Holy Alliance was meant to be. 

Unfortunately, the material and spiritual requirements for the full implementa¬ 
tion of this grandiose idea were lacking. Around Mettemich there were not enough 
capable men and leaders. The unity of a defensive front on the political and social 
plane was a clear and evident concept; what was not so clear was the idea that was 
capable of being a positive reference point and a chrism for this alliance so that it 
could really be holy. To begin with, in the context of religion there was no unity, 
since the league was not limited only to Catholic monarchs, but it also included 
Protestant and Orthodox ones as well; thus, this alliance did not even have the direct 
and immediate sanction of the Catholic Church, the head of which never joined it. 
What was really needed was a revival of the spirit of the Middle Ages, better yet, of 
the Crusades; what was really needed was not just the mere repressive action and 
the commitment to military intervention wherever a revolutionary flame began to 
flicker within the territories covered by the alliance, but rather something like a new 
Templarism, an order, a block of men united by a common idea and relentless in 
action who could give in every country a Jiving witness to the return of a superior 
human type. Men such as these were needed rather than the courtiers, ministers of 
police, prudent Church leaders, and diplomats only concerned with finding a “bal¬ 
anced solution.” At the same time, an attack should have been launched on the ideal 
plane for a view of the world and of life. But who were the representatives of the 
pure traditional spirit who in that period would have been capable of extirpating the 
hotbeds of the rationalistic, illuministic, and scientistic mentality that were the true 
ferment of the revolution? Where were those who would have disavowed that cul¬ 
ture that, beginning in the 1700s, the royal courts and the aristocracies found it fash¬ 
ionable to be part of, or those who would have been able to cover with ridicule rather 
than with chains all those who romantically portrayed themselves as the apostles 
and martyrs of the “great and noble ideas of the revolution” and the “freedom of the 
people ? Lacking a true soul and having jumped at the center of Europe’s attention 
at the time when the Holy Roman Empire had ceased to exist even nominally- 


owing to the voluntary renunciation of the Hapsburgs—Vienna was famous mainly 
as the “city of waltzes.” The Holy Alliance, after ensuring a parenthesis of relative 
peace and order in Europe, was eventually dissolved and revolutionary national¬ 
isms, which disintegrated the previous political and dynastic units, no longer found 
any tough resistance to halt their onslaught. 

With World War I, the Russian Revolution, and World War U the decisive events 
of the last age are ushered in. In 1914 the central empires stil l represented within the 
Western world a remainder of the feudal and aristocratic Europe, despite the un¬ 
deniable aspects of militaristic hegemonism and some questionable collusions with 
capitalism, especially in Wilhelm’s Germany. The coalition against the central em¬ 
pires was expressly a coalition of the Third Estate against the residual forces of the 
Second; it was a coalition of nationalisms and the great democracies more or less 
inspired by the “immortal principles” of the French Revolution, which some people 
wanted to replicate on an international scale and which fact did not prevent the 
humanitarian and patriotic ideology from playing into the hands of a greedy and 
supremacist high finance. As few other times before, World War I displays the traits 
of a conflict not between states and nations, but rather between ideologies of differ¬ 
ent castes. The immediate and wil lfully pursued results of this war were the destruc¬ 
tion of the German monarchy and Catholic Austria; the indirect results were the 
collapse of the Czars’ empire, the communist revolution, and the establishment in 
Europe of a sociopolitical situation that was so chaotic and contradictory as to con¬ 
tain all the premises of a new conflagration. 

World War II was this new conflagration. In this war the ideological line-ups 
were not as precise as in the previous war. States like Germany and Italy that had 
appropriated the authoritarian and antidemocratic idea and had sided against left- 
wing forces, by their initially upholding in this war the right of “nations in need of 
living space” as they struggled against world plutocracy, almost appeared to espouse 
Marxism on the international plane by giving to the war they waged the meaning of 
an insurrection of the Fourth Estate against the great democracies in which the power 
of the Third Estate had been consolidated. But overall, and especially after the United 
States entered into the conflict, what appeared to be a prevalent ideology was one 
that had already shaped World War I, namely, the crusade of the democratic nations 
bent on “liberating” the people still enslaved to what were looked upon as “back- 

3, With regard to the dubious ideological alignments during World War II, one should notice in the two 
powers of the Axis, Italy and Germany, the negative element proper to “totalitarianism” and the new 
forms of dictatorial “Bonapartism.” With regard to the other power of the Tripartite Pact (Japan), it would 
have been interesting to see the results of an unprecedented experiment, that is, of an external “European¬ 
ization” coupled with an internal retention of the traditional spirit of an empire of divine right. Concerning 
the appraisal of both positive and negative elements of Fascism, see my Jl fascismo: saggiodi unit analisi 
critica dal punto di vista della Destra (Rome, 1964). 


342 


343 



Geii{si$ add Face of the ITIoDERn UJorld 


ward political systems.” 3 The latter was destined rapidly to become a mere facade 
with regard to new political alignments. In their alliance with the Soviet Union, which 
was willed in order to bring down the powers of the Axis, and in their persevering in 
a mindless radicalism, the democratic powers repeated the error of those who think 
they can employ with impunity and for their own purposes the forces of subversion, 
and who, by following a fatal logic, ignore the fact that when the forces representing 
two different degrees of subversion meet or clash, those corresponding to the higher 
degree will eventually prevail. In reality it can clearly be seen how, from the Soviet 
side, the democratic crusade had been conceived only as a preparatory stage in 
the global plans of communism. The end of the war marked the end of the hybrid 
alliance and the real outcome of World War II was the elimination of Europe as a 
main protagonist in world politics, the sweeping away of any intermediate form, and 
the opposition of America and Russia as supemational exponents of the forces of the 
Third and Fourth Estates, respectively. 

It leally does not matter what the outcome of an eventual conflict between these 
two powers will be. The determinisms of some kind of immanent justice are at work; 
in any event, the process will reach the end. A third world war in its social repercus¬ 
sions will eventually determine the triumph of the Fourth Estate, either in a violent 
way, or as an “evolution,” or in both forms. 

There is more. On the plane of the political powers pursuing world domination, 
Russia and America appear today in an antagonistic relationship. And yet if one 
examines in their essence the dominant themes in both civilizations, and if their 
ideals are closely scrutinized as well as the effective transformations that, following 
a central tendency, all the values and the interests of life have undergone in both of 
them, then it is possible to notice a convergence and a congeniality. Russia and 
America appear as two different expressions of the same thing, as two ways leading 
to the formation of that human type that is the ultimate conclusion of the processes 
that preside over the development of the modem world. It may be worthwhile to 
focus briefly on these convergences. Not only as political convergences but also as 
civilizations, Russia and America are like two ends of the same pair of pincers, 
that are closing in from the East and the West around the nucleus of ancient Europe, 
which is too depleted in its energies and in its men to put up an effective resistance. 
Tire external conflicts, new crises, and new destructions will only be the means to 
definitely open the way for the varieties of the world of the Fourth Estate. 


344 


37 



Russia 

I n the Bolshevik revolution there are some traits worth examining. The revolu- 
tion had very few of the romantic, stormy, chaotic, and irrational overtones that 
characterized other revolutions, especially the French one; on the contrary, it was 
intelligently planned and well executed. Lenin himself, from beginning to end, stud¬ 
ied the problem of proletarian revolution like a mathematician dealing with a com¬ 
plex calculus problem by analyzing it in a detached and lucid way in all of its details. 
He was quoted as saying: “Martyrs and heroes are not necessary to the cause of the 
revolution; what the revolution needs is sound logic and an iron hand. Our task is not 
to lower the revolution to the level of the amateur, but to transform the amateur into 
a revolutionary.” The counterpart of this view was Trotsky’s activity, which made of 
the uprising and of the coup d’etat not so much a problem of the masses and of the 
people, but rather a technique requiring the employment of specialized and well- 
directed teams. 1 

In the leaders of the Bolshevik revolution it is possible to detect a ruthless ideo¬ 
logical coherence. They were absolutely indifferent to the practical consequences 
and the countless calamities that derived from the application ol abstract principles; 
to them “man” as such did not exist. It is almost as if in Bolshevism elemental forces 
became incarnated in a group of men who coupled the fierce concentration typical of 
a fanatic with the exact logic, method, and focus on the most effective means typical 
of a technician. 

It was only in a second phase, which these Leaders gave rise to and largely 
maintained within preestablished limits, that the uprising of the masses inhabiting 
the ancient Russian empire, and the regime of terror aimed at frantically extirpating 
what was connected to the ruling classes, eventually occurred. 

1. C. Malaparte, La Technique du coup d’dlat (Paris, 1931), 13. 


345 



taw HDD Face of the FTIoDERn ULIorld 


The Ehd oe the (me 


Another characteristic trait was that while previous revolutions almost always 
escaped from the control of those who had started them and ended up devouring 
their ‘‘children,” this happened only to a small degree in Russia, where a continuity 
of power and terror was firmly established. Even though the logic of the red revolu¬ 
tion did not hesitate to eliminate or remove those Bolsheviks who dared to venture 
outside the orthodox trajectory, and even though it had no regard for individuals and 
no scruples about the means to be employed for these removals, still, at the center of 
the revolution there were never relevant crises or oscillations. This is indeed a char¬ 
acteristic as well as sinister trait; it foreshadows an era in which the forces of dark¬ 
ness will no longer work behind the scenes but come out into the open, having found 
their most suitable incarnation in beings in whom daemonism teams up with a lucid 
intellect, a method, and a strong will to power. A phenomenon of this kind is one of 
the most salient characteristics of the terminal point of every cycle. 

As far as the communist idea is concerned, anybody who forgets that there are 
two truths in communism is likely to be deceived. The first “esoteric” truth has a 
dogmatic and immutable character; it corresponds to the basic tenets of the revolu¬ 
tion and is formulated in the writings and in the directives of the early Bolshevik 
period. The second is a changeable and “realistic” truth, which is forged case by 
case, often in apparent contrast with the first truth, and characterized by eventual 
compromises with the ideas of the “bourgeois” world (e.g., the patriotic idea, mitiga¬ 
tion in the collectivization of private property, the Slavic myth, and so on). The vari¬ 
eties of this second truth are usually set aside as soon as they have achieved their 
tactical objective; they are mere instruments at the service of the first truth. There¬ 
fore, those who would fall into this trap and believe that Bolshevism is a thing of the 
past, that it has evolved and that it is going to take on normal forms of government 
and international relations, are indeed extremely naive. 

However, one should not be deceived about the first truth either; the Marxist 
economic myth is not its primary element. The primary element is the disavowal of 
every spiritual and transcendent value; the philosophy and the sociology of historical 
materialism are just expressions of this disavowal and derive from it, not the other 
way around, and the corresponding communist praxis is but one of the many meth¬ 
ods employed systematically to carry it out. Thus, there is an important consequence 
that can be arrived at by following this path all the way to the end and that is the 
integration, or better, the disintegration of the single individual into the so-called 
collective, which rules supreme. In the communist world an important goal is the 
elimination in man of everything that has the value of autonomous personality and 
of all that may represent an interest unrelated to the needs of the collectivity. More 
specifically, the mechanization, disintellectualization, and rationalization of every 


activity, on every plane, are the means employed to this end, rather than being, as in 
the last European civilization, the much deplored and passively suffered consequences 
of fatal processes. Once every horizon is reduced to that of the economy, the ma¬ 
chine becomes the center of a new messianic promise and rationalization appears as 
one of the ways to eliminate the “residues” and the “individualistic rough edges” 
inherited from the “bourgeois era.” 

In the USSR, the abolition of private property and enterprise, which exists as a 
basic idea in the core doctrines of communism beyond various contingent accommo¬ 
dations, represents only an episode and the means to an end. The goal is the realiza¬ 
tion of collective man and radical materialism in every domain and with an obvious 
disproportion with regard to anything that may be deduced from any mere economic 
myth. It is typical of the communist system to regard the “I,” the “soul,” and the 
notion ot “mine” as bourgeois illusions and prejudices, fixed ideas, and the prin¬ 
ciples of all evil and disorder from which an adequate, realistic culture and peda¬ 
gogy must free the man living in the new Marxist-Leninist civilization. This is how a 
radical elimination of all the individualistic, libertarian, humanist, and romantic false¬ 
hoods of the phase I have called “Western unrealism,” is achieved. There is a well- 
known saying by Zinoviev: “In every intellectual I see an enemy of the Soviet power.” 
The will to turn art into art for the use of the masses, to stop art from doing “psychol¬ 
ogy” and from busying itself with the private concerns of single individuals, and to 
prevent art from delighting the parasitic higher classes and being an individualistic 
production is also well-known. The goal is rather to depersonalize art and transform 
it into “a powerful hammer spurring on the working class to action.” That science 
may prescind itself from politics—that is, from the communist idea as a formative 
power—and be “objective” is refuted by communist authorities who see in this a 
dangerous “counterrevolutionary” deviation. An example of this mentality was the 
case of Vasiliev and the other biologists who were sent to Siberia because the ge¬ 
netic theory that they upheld, which consisted in acknowledging the factors of “he¬ 
redity” and of “innate disposition” and in viewing man as other than an amorphous 
substance that takes shape only through the determining action of the environment, 
as Marxism would have it, did not correspond to the central idea of communism. The 
most radical theories of evolutionary materialism and sociological scientism found 
in Western thought are assumed by communism and turned into dogma and into the 
“official view of the state,” the results being the brainwashing of the new genera¬ 
tions and the contribution to the diffusion of a specific mentality. Enough is known 
about the antireligious campaign waged in the USSR, where it does not have the 
character of mere atheism, but rather of a real counterreligion; the latter betrays the 
true essence of Bolshevism mentioned above, which thus organizes the most apt 


346 


347 



Gehesis bod Fdce of the (TloDERn UJored 


The EnD of the Okie 


means to eliminate the great disease of Western man, namely, that “faith” and need 
to “believe” that became his surrogates once the contact with the superworld was 
lost. An “education of feelings” in a similar direction is also contemplated so that the 
complications of the “bourgeois man,” sentimentalism, and the obsession with eroti¬ 
cism and the passions may once and for all be eliminated. After the social classes 
have been leveled, and considering that only the articulations imposed by technoc¬ 
racy and the totalitarian apparatus are respected, even the sexes are leveled; 
the complete equality of women with men is sanctioned in every domain since an 
ideal of communism is to eliminate the differences between men and women, who 
are henceforth to be considered as “comrades ” Thus, even the family is looked 
down upon, not only according to what it represented in the “age of the heroic right,” 
but also in the residues proper to the bourgeois period. The so-called ZAGS (“regis¬ 
try offices for documents of civil status”) represented a characteristic change in 
this regard. Anyway, it is well-known that in the USSR education is totally in the 
hands of the state, so that the child may learn to prefer the “collective” life to family 
life. 

In the first constitution of the USSR a foreigner was automatically regarded as a 
member of the Union of the Soviets if he was a proletarian worker, whereas a Rus¬ 
sian, if he was not a proletarian worker, was excluded from this union, denatural¬ 
ized, and regarded as a pariah lacking a juridical personality. 2 According to strict 
communist orthodoxy, Russia was simply the country in which the world revolution 
of the Fourth Estate triumphed and was first organized in order to expand further. In 
addition to a mysticism of the collectivity, the Russian people have traditionally 
been characterized by a confused messianic impulse regarding themselves as a God¬ 
carrying people predestined to a work of universal redemption. All this was devel¬ 
oped in an inverted form and updated in Marxist terms: God was transformed into 
the materialized and collectivized man, and the “God-carrying people” became the 
one attempting to impose its civilization on this earth through any available means. 
The ensuing mitigation of the extremist version of this thesis, exemplified by the 
stigmatization of Trotskyism, did not prevent the USSR from thinking it had the right 
and even the duty to intervene anywhere in the world to support the cause of com¬ 
munism. 

From a historical point of view, during the Stalinist phase the myth of the “revo¬ 
lution in the older sense of the word, which was always associated with chaos and 

Sertoli, La costituzione russa (Florence, 1928), 67-85. This paradoxic;tl situation occurred: once the 
pariahs oiganized themselves into an omnipotent organization, they reduced to the status of pariah any¬ 
body who adhered to the values and was faithful to the class principles that traditionally defined the 
nonpariah. 


disorder, is already a thing of the past; a new form of social order and unity is pur¬ 
sued through totalitarianism. Society becomes a machine in which there is only one 
engine, the communist state. Man is just a lever or cog in this machine for which the 
value of human life is null and any infamy is allowed, and as soon as man opposes it 
he is immediately swept away and broken by its gears. Matter and spirit are enrolled 
in a common effort, and thus the USSR appears as a bloc that does not leave any¬ 
thing outside itself; a bloc that is simultaneously state, trust, and church, as well as a 
political, ideological, and economical-industrial system. This is the ideal of the su¬ 
perstate as the sinister inversion of the traditional organic ideal. 

Generally speaking, in the Soviet communist ideal there are aspects in which 
some soil of peculiar asceticism or catharsis is at work to attain the radical overcom¬ 
ing of the individualistic and humanistic element and the return to the principles of 
absolute reality and impersonality; and yet this overcoming is upside down, in other 
words, it is not directed upwards but downwards; not toward the superhuman, but 
toward the subpersonal; not toward organicism, but toward mechanism; not toward 
spiritual liberation, but toward total social enslavement. 

For practical purposes it does not really matter that the primitivism of the great 
heteroclite mass that comprises the USSR, in which all the racially superior ele¬ 
ments have been eliminated through mass purges, may postpone to an indefinite 
future the effective formation of the “new man,” and the “Soviet man.” A direction 
has been imparted. The terminal myth of the world of the Fourth Estate has taken a 
decisive foirn and one of the greatest concentrations of power in the world is at its 
service; this power is the headquarters of all organized actions, whether covert or 
open, of the instigation of the international masses and of the colored peoples. 

America 

Although Bolshevism, according to Lenin’s words, saw the Roman and Germanic 
world as the “greatest obstacle to the advent of the new man,” and although, by 
taking advantage of the blinding of the democratic nations that willed a “crusade” 
against the powers of the Axis, it has been successful in eliminating that world as far 
as the direction of European destiny is concerned, as an ideology it has regarded 
America as some kind of promised land. With the demise of the old gods, the conse¬ 
quence of the exaltation of the technical and mechanica] ideal was a kind of “cult of 
America.” “The revolutionary storm of Soviet Russia must join the pace of Ameri¬ 
can life,” and, “The task of the new proletarian Russia is to intensify the mechaniza¬ 
tion already at work in America and to extend it to every domain,” have been the 
official directives. Thus, Gasteff proclaimed “super-Americanism” and the poet 
Mayakovski celebrated Chicago, the “electro-dynamo-mechanical metropolis,” with 


348 


349 



Geiiem mid Face of the FTIoDERn LUorld 


The EnD of the Chele 


his collectivist hymn. 3 Obviously here the hated America, regarded as the bulwark 
of “capitalist imperialism/’ faded into the background while America as the civiliza¬ 
tion of the machine, quantity, and technocracy came into the foreground. References 
to congeniality, far from being extrinsic, may be confirmed in the elements taken 
from several other domains. 

What and how many the divergences are between Russia and America in an eth¬ 
nic, historical, and temperamental context is well-known and does not require any 
further illustrations. These divergences, however, are powerless before a fundamental 
fact; parts of an “ideal” that in Bolshevism either does not exist as such or is imposed 
with crude means have been realized in America through an almost spontaneous pro¬ 
cess, so much so as to acquire a natural and evident character. Tlrus, in a context much 
wider than he would have ever imagined, Engels’ prophecy has been fulfilled, namely, 
that the world of capitalism would open the way for the Fourth Estate. 

America too, in the essential way it views life and the world, has created a 
“civilization” that represents the exact contradiction of the ancient European tradi¬ 
tion. It has introduced the religion of praxis and productivity; it has put the quest for 
profit, great industrial production, and mechanical, visible, and quantitative achieve¬ 
ments over and above any other interest. It has generated a soulless greatness of a 
purely technological and collective nature, lacking any background of transcendence, 
inner light, and true spirituality. America has also put the view in which man is 
considered in terms of quality and personality within an organic system in opposition 
with that view in which man becomes a mere instrument of production and material 
productivity within a conformist social conglomerate. 

While in the formation process of the Soviet communist mentality the mass- 
man who lived mystically in the subsoil of the Slavic race has had a relevant role 
(the only modem feature is the context in which it can carry out its rational incarna¬ 
tion within an omnipotent political structure), in America this phenomenon derives 
from an inflexible determinism by virtue of which man, in the act of detaching him¬ 
self from the spiritual dimension and in pursuing a merely temporal greatness, and 
having overcome all individualist illusions, ceases to belong to himself and becomes 
dependent part of an entity that eventually he can no longer control and that condi- 
ns him in multiple ways. The ideal of material conquest that is associated with 
ysical well-being and “prosperity” has determined the transformations and the 
rversions that America represents. 

It has been correctly pointed out that: 

3. R. Fulbp-Miller, Mind and Face of Bolshevism (London, 1927). Stalin himself, in his Principles of Leninism, 
declared that the union of the revolutionary spirit and Americanism characterizes the style of Leninism in 
the work of the party and the state, as well as the complete type of the Leninist activist. 


In its race toward richness and power, America has abandoned the axis 
of freedom in order to follow that of productivity. ... All the energies, 
including those related to the ideals and to religion, lead toward the 
same productive purpose: we are in the presence of a productive soci¬ 
ety, almost a theocracy of productivity, which is increasingly aiming at 
producing things rather than people, or people only as more efficient 
workers . . . 

In the U.S., some kind of mysticism surrounds the supreme rights of 
the community. The human being, having become a means rather than 
an end in itself, accepts the role of “cog-in-the machine” without think¬ 
ing for a second that in the process he may be somewhat belittled, . . . 

Hence, a collectivism which is willed by the elites and acritically ac¬ 
cepted by the masses, surreptitiously undermines man’s autonomy and 
strictly channels his actions, thus confirming his very abdication with¬ 
out him realizing it.. .. No protests and no reaction of the great Ameri¬ 
can masses ever ensued against the collective tyranny. They accept it 
freely, as a natural thing, and almost as if it were expedient . 4 

On this basis the same themes emerge, in the sense that even in the more general 
domain of culture there is a necessary and spontaneous correspondence with the 
principles that shape the Soviet world. 

And therefore, although America is far from banning the culture of intellectual¬ 
ity, it certainly nurtures an instinctive indifference toward it, and to the degree that 
intellectuality does not become an instrument of something practical, it is almost as 
if it were a luxury that those who are intent upon serious things (such as “getting rich 
fast,” “volunteer work,” and sundry campaigns and lobbies to promote various social 
issues) should not indulge in. Generally speaking, in the USA, while men work, 
women get involved in “spiritual issues”; hence the strong percentage of women in 
countless sects and societies in which spiritualism, psychoanalysis, and counteifeits 
of Eastern doctrines are mixed with humanitarianism, feminism, and sentimental¬ 
ism, as well as with social versions of puritanism and scientism—all things that truly 
reflect the American understanding of “spirituality.” And when we see America 
acquire with its dollars some representatives and works of ancient European culture 
for the benefit and the enjoyment of the upper crust of the Third Estate, the true 
center lies elsewhere. In America any inventor who discovers some new tool that 

4. A. Siegfried, Les Etats-Unis d’aujourd’hui (Paris, 1927), 436, 349, 350. There is another, opposite phe¬ 
nomenon to be considered, represented by the so-called beat generation and by the “hipsters” in whom an 
existential rebellion of some youth against American civilization has only an anarchist and destructive 
character, often ending up without any good causes to fight for and lacking a higher reference point. See 
my L'arco e la clava, chap, 14, entitled “Youth, the ‘Beats’ and Right-wing Anarchists.” 


350 


351 



Genesis mid Fncc of the IHoderei LUorld 


The Edd of the (yat 


will improve production will always win more social approval and acknowledgment 
than the traditional type of the intellectual; moreover, anything that is profit, reality, 
or action in the material sense of the word will always be valued more than anything 
that may derive from a line of aristocratic dignity. Thus, even though America has 
not officially banished ancient philosophy like communism did, it has done some¬ 
thing better; through a William James it has declared that the useful is the criterion of 
truth and that the value of any concept, even metaphysical ones, should be measured 
by its practical efficiency, which in the context of the American mentality always 
ends up meaning “socioeconomic efficiency.” So-called pragmatism is one of the 
more typical features of the entire American civilization; among others are Dewey’s 
theories and so-called behaviorism, this last being the exact reflection of theories 
developed from Pavlov’s studies concerning conditioned reflexes; it totally excludes 
the existence of an “I” and of a substantial principle called “consciousness.” The 
consequence of this typically “democratic” theory is that anybody can become any¬ 
thing they wish to be, provided a certain amount of training and pedagogy be sup¬ 
plied; in other words man, in himself, is believed to be a shapeless and moldable 
substance, just like communism wants him to be when it regards as antirevolutionary 
and anti-Marxist the genetic theory of innate qualities elaborated in the field of biol¬ 
ogy. The power that advertising enjoys in the USA can be explained by the inner 
inconsistency and passivity of the American soul, which in many respects displays 
the two-dimensional characteristics of puberty rather than youth. 

Soviet communism officially professes atheism. America does not go that far, 
and yet without realizing it, and often believing the contrary, it is running down a 
path in which nothing is left of what in the context of Catholicism had a religious 
meaning. I have previously discussed what religiosity is reduced to in Protestantism; 
once eveiy principle of authority and hierarchy has been rejected and religiosity has 
rid itself of metaphysical interest, dogmas, rituals, symbols, and sacraments, it has 
thereby been reduced to mere moralism, which in puritan Anglo-Saxon countries, 
and especially in America, is employed in the service of a conformist collectivity. 

Siegfried has correctly pointed out that “the only true American religion is Cal¬ 
vinism, understood as the view according to which the true cell of the social organ¬ 
ism is not the individual, but the community,” in which wealth is regarded, in one’s 
mind as well as in others’, as a sign of divine election. Thus, “it becomes difficult to 
distinguish between religious aspiration and the pursuit of wealth ... It is regarded as 
a moral and even as a desirable thing for the religious spirit to become a factor of 
social progress and of economic development.” 5 Consequently, the traditional vir- 

5. Op. cit., 35-36,40,51. 


tues that are required to achieve any supernatural goal eventually come to be re¬ 
garded as useless and even harmful. In the eyes of a typical American, the ascetic is 
regarded as one who wastes time, when he is not looked down upon as a social 
parasite; the hero, in the ancient sense, is regarded as some kind of fanatic or lunatic 
to be neutralized through pacifism and humanitarianism, while the fanatical puritan 
moralist is himself surrounded by a bright aura. 

Is all this that far off from Lenin’s recommendation to ostracize “every view 
that is supernatural or extraneous to class interests” and wipe out as an infectious 
disease any residue of independent spirituality? Does not the technocratic ideology 
arise both in America and in Russia from the ranks of secularized and all-powerful 
men? 6 

Let us reflect on the following point. Through the New Economic Policy (NEP) 
in Russia private capitalism was abolished only to be replaced with state capitalism; 
the latter consisted of a centralized capitalism without any visible capitalists and it 
engaged in a mastodonic yet hopeless enterprise. In theory, every Soviet citizen was 
both a worker and an investor in the all-inclusive socialist state. For practical pur¬ 
poses he was an investor who never received dividends; aside from what he was 
given to make a living, the fruit of his work went to the party, which in turn invested 
it in other companies and industries without allowing it to stop circulating and to end 
up in anybody’s pocket. The result was the ever greater power of collective man, 
though not without a specific relation to the plans of global revolution and subver¬ 
sion. Let us recall what has been said about the role that asceticism plays in capital¬ 
ism (a typically American phenomenon) and about wealth, which in America in¬ 
stead of being the goal of one’s work and the means to display a greatness that 
transcends mere economic fortunes, becomes the means to generate more work, 
new profits, and so on in an endless and uninterrupted chain. Once we keep this in 
mind, we will see that in America, what asserts itself here and there in a spontaneous 
way and in the context of “freedom,” is the same style that the centralized structures 
of the communist state try to realize in a violent way. Moreover, in the appalling size 
of the American metropolis, in which the individual (the “nomad of the asphalt”) 
realizes his nothingness before the immense reign of quantity, before the groups, 

6. The emergence in America of “atheist Christianity’’ and of the “theologians of the death of God” (such as 
T. Altizer, Paul van Buren, and J. A. T. Robinson) is a recent and very significant phenomenon. According 
to this movement, the idea of God in its aspect of transcendence and supematuralism ought to be dis¬ 
missed, since it is no longer operative or acceptable to modem man; better yet, modem man should not 
even be bothered with the term “god,” due to the traditional implications of such a term. The only thing to 
be spared is a “demythologized” and secularized version of Christianity, amounting to nothing more than 
a social and humanitarian morality. 


352 


353 


Gehem bud Face of the IHodm UUorld 


The Did of the CytLE 


trusts, and omnipotent standards, before the jungle of skyscrapers and factories, while 
the dominators are chained to the very things they dominate—in all this the collec¬ 
tive dimension is increasingly revealed in a greater form of anonymity than in the 
tyranny exercised by the Soviet system over its primitive and abulic subjects. 

The intellectual standardization, conformism, and mandatory normalization that 
is organized on a grand scale are typically American phenomena, though they hap¬ 
pen to coincide with the Soviet ideal of the “official view of the state” that is to be 
imposed on the collectivity. It has rightly been observed that every American (whether 
he be named Wilson or Roosevelt, Bryan or Rockefeller) is an evangelist who can¬ 
not leave his fellow men alone, who constantly feels the need to preach and work for 
the conversion, purification, and elevation of each and everyone to the standard 
moral level of America, which he believes to be superior and higher than all others. 
This attitude originated with abolitionism during the Civil War and culminated with 
the double democratic “crusade” in Europe envisioned by Wilson and by Roosevelt. 
And yet even in minor matters, whether it be prohibitionism or the feminist, pacifist, 
or environmental propaganda, we always find the same spirit, the same leveling and 
standardizing will and the petulant intrusion of the collective and the social dimen¬ 
sion in the individual sphere. Nothing is further from the truth than the claim that the 
American soul is “open-minded” and unbiased; on the contrary, it is ridden with 
countless taboos of which people are sometimes not even aware. 

I have said before that one of the reasons why the Bolshevik ideology took a 
liking to America is due to the fact that it fully realized how, in the latter’s type of 
civilization, technology contributes to the idea of depersonalization. The moral stan¬ 
dard corresponds to the American’s practical standard. The comforts available to 
everyone and the superproduction of consumerist civilization that characterize the 
USA have been purchased with the enslavement of millions of people to the au¬ 
tomatism of work, as if in their work they have been formed by an extreme level of 
specialization that narrows the mental field of action and dulls every sensibility. 
Instead of the type of the artisan, for whom every job was an art and whose produc¬ 
tion carried the imprint of personality (since it presupposed a personal, direct, and 
qualitative knowledge of that particular trade), we have today a herd of pariah who 
dumbly witness the work of machines, the secrets of which are known only to the 
person in charge of repairing them. Stalin and Ford can be said to meet here, and 
thus a vicious circle is established; the standardization inherent in every mechanical 
and quantitative product determines and imposes the standardization on those who 
purchase them; the uniformity of tastes and progressive reduction to a few types 
corresponds to what is directly manifested in people’s minds. In America every tiling 
works toward this goal; conformism in terms of “matter of fact” and “like-mindedness” 


is the password on all planes of existence. Thus, when the dams are not broken by 
the phenomenon of organized crime and by other uncontrolled forms of 
“supercompensation” (I have previously mentioned the “beat generation”), the 
American soul is protected from any transcendent vocation by its optimistic, sports- 
minded, and simplistic view of the world. 

Thus, the great majority of Americans could be said to represent a refutation on 
a large scale of the Cartesian principle, “Cogito ergo sum”; they “do not think and 
are.” Better yet, in many cases they are dangerous individuals and in several in¬ 
stances their primitivism goes way beyond die Slavic primitivism of “homo sovieticus. ” 

Obviously, the leveling process applies to the sexes as well. The Soviet emanci¬ 
pation of the woman parallels that emancipation that in America the feminist idiocy, 
deriving from “democracy” all its logical conclusions, had achieved a long time ago 
in conjunction with the materialistic and practical degradation of man. Through count¬ 
less and repeated divorces the disintegration of the family in America is character¬ 
ized by the same pace that we could expect in a society that knows only “comrades.” 
The women, having given up their true nature, believe they can elevate themselves 
by taking on and practicing all kinds of traditionally masculine activities. These women 
are chaste in their immorality and banal even in their lowest perversions; quite often 
they find in alcohol the way to rid themselves of the repressed or deviated energies 
of their own nature. Moreover, young women seem to know very little of the polarity 
and the elemental magnetism of sex as they indulge in a comradely and sportive 
promiscuity. These phenomena are typically American, even though their conta¬ 
gious diffusion all over the world makes it difficult for people to trace their origin to 
America. Actually, if there is a difference between this promiscuity and that envi¬ 
sioned by communism, it is resolved in a pejorative sense by a gynaecocratic factor, 
since every woman and young girl in America and other Anglo-Saxon countries 
considers it only natural that some kind of preeminence and existential respectabil¬ 
ity be bestowed upon her as if it were her inalienable right. 7 

In the early days of Bolshevism somebody formulated tire ideal of a cacopho¬ 
nous, collectivist music that was meant to purify music itself of its sentimental bour¬ 
geois content. This is what America has realized on a large scale and spread all over 
the world through a very significant phenomenon: jazz. In the ballrooms of Ameri¬ 
can cities where hundreds of couples shake like epileptic and automatic puppets to 
the sounds of black music, what is awakened is truly a “mass state” and the life of a 
mechanized collective entity. Very few phenomena are so indicative of the general 

7. This is also reflected in the incredible severity of the penal sanctions that in some states (including the 
death penalty) are being meted out for “sexual crimes” against women. 


354 


355 



Genesis mid Face oe the (Hodem World 


The End oe the Cejcle 


structure of the modem world in its last phase as this, since what characterizes it is 
the coexistence of a mechanical, inanimate element consisting in movement of a 
primitivist and subpersonal type that transports man into a climate of turbid sensa¬ 
tions (“a petrified forest wrecked by chaos, 51 said H. Miller). Moreover, what in Bol¬ 
shevism was programmed and occasionally realized in theatrical representations of 
the awakening of the proletarian world in view of a systematic activation of the 
masses, in America found its equivalent long ago but on a larger scale and in a 
spontaneous form; I am referring to the senseless delirium of sporting events, which 
are based on a plebeian and materialistic degradation of the cult of action. These 
frenzies represent the phenomena of the incursion of the collective and the regres¬ 
sion into the collective. 

Walt Whitman, the American poet and mystic of democracy, may be regarded 
as the forerunner of that "collective poetry” that urges one to action, which is one of 
the communist ideals and programs. A similar kind of lyricism penneates several 
aspects of the American life: sports, ceaseless activity, productivity, and volunteer 
work. Just as in the case of the USSR we can only wait for adequate developments to 
resolve the primitivist and chaotic residues of the Slavic soul, likewise, in America 
one can logically expect the individualistic residues of the spirit of the cowboys, 
pioneers, and what is still to transpire from the deeds of gangsters and anarchical 
existentialists to be eventually reduced and taken up in the mainstream. 

If this was the proper context, it would be easy to produce more evidence con¬ 
cerning the similarities between the two countries that would allow us to see in com¬ 
munist Russia and in America two faces of the same coin, or two movements whose 
destructive paths converge. The former is a reality unfolding under the iron fist of a 
dictatorship and through a radical nationalization and rationalization. The latter is a 
spontaneous realization (and therefore more worrisome) of a mankind that accepts 
and even wants to be what it is, that feels healthy, free, and strong and that imple¬ 
ments the same tendencies as communism but without the fanatical and fatalistic 
dedication of the communist Slav. And yet, behind both "civilizations” those who 
have eyes to see can detect the warning signs of the advent of the "Nameless Beast.” 

Despite all, there are some who still believe that American "democracy” is the 
antidote for Soviet communism and the only alternative for the so-called free world. 
Generally speaking, a danger is clearly recognized in the presence of a brutal, physi¬ 
cal attack from the outside but not one coming from the inside. For quite some time 
Europe has been under the influence of America and therefore has undergone the 
perversion of traditional values and ideals inherent in the North American world. 
This has happened as some sort of fatal reaction. America represents a "Far West,” 
and it contains the further and radical development of the basic trends that have 


been adopted by modern Western civilization. Thus, it is not possible to put up a 
valid resistance to the modem world while still holding on to the principles and espe¬ 
cially to the technological and productive mirage on which this world is based. With 
the development of this accelerating influence, chances are that the closing of the 
pincers from East and West around a Europe, which following World War II, has no 
new ideas to offer and that ceased to enjoy the rank of an autonomous and hegemonic 
world power even in the political arena, will not even be perceived with a sense of 
capitulation. The final collapse will not even have the character of a tragedy. 

The communist world and America, in their being persuaded of having a uni¬ 
versal mission to accomplish, represent a reality to be reckoned with. An eventual 
conflict between them will be, on the plane of world subversion, the last of the vio¬ 
lent operations and will require the beastly holocaust of millions of human lives; and 
so, the last phase of the involution and shift of power through all four traditional 
castes and the advent of a collectivized humanity will eventually be achieved. And 
even if the feared catastrophe of a nuclear holocaust is averted, this civilization of 
titans, iron, crystal, and cement metropolises, of swarming masses, statistics, and 
technology that keeps the forces of matter at the leash will appear as a world that 
wobbles in its orbit; one day it will wrest itself free and lose itself in a space in which 
there is no light other than the sinister glow cast by the acceleration of its own fall. 


356 


357 


Conclusion 


Conclusion 


T hose who have been forced by the sheer evidence of the facts to acknowledge 
what they have called “the decline of the West,” usually make their consider¬ 
ations follow various appeals aimed at erecting some defenses or provoking reac¬ 
tions. I personally do not have any illusions nor do I want to delude others or abandon 
what I consider a sober and objective perception of reality for the consolation pro¬ 
vided by an easy and cheap optimism. 

The only ones who can still harbor some hope are those who have accepted 
conditioned perspectives, and who are suffering from the very “disease” they are 
attempting to defeat. Conversely, those who, having assumed as reference points 
the spirit and forms that characterize every authentic and traditional civilization, 
were able to travel upstream to the origins and see the phases of the unfolding of 
history, are also aware of the immense effort it would take not only to return, but 
even to approximate a normal (traditional) social order. These people are therefore 
bound to see the future differently from other people. 

The reader will have to acknowledge that the transformations and the events 
the West has undergone so far are not arbitrary and contingent, but rather proceed 
from a very specific chain of causes. I am not espousing the perspective of determin¬ 
ism since I believe that in this chain there is no fate at work other than the one that 
men have created for themselves. The “river” of history flows along the riverbed it 
has carved for itself. It is not easy, however, to think it possible to reverse the flow 
when the current has become overwhelming and all too powerful. Those who deny 
that some kind of determinism was at work in the process of the “fall” must also 
admit that there is no determinism in the opposite sense, in other words, it still has to 
be established whether, after the end of a cycle, a new ascending phase will be 
continuous with the previous ones. 

In any event, the West can be saved only by a return to the traditional spirit in 
the context of a new unitary European consciousness. What could possibly be the 
basis for such a return? 


I said: “in the context of a unitary European consciousness.” This is the real 
dilemma. The West needs to return to tradition in a large, universal, unanimous way 
that encompasses every form of life and of light; in the sense, that is, of a unitary 
spirit and order that may rule supreme over every man, in every group and people in 
every sector of existence. I am not referring to tradition in an aristocratic and secret 
sense, as the deposit entrusted to a few or to an elite acting behind the scenes of 
history. Tradition has always existed in this subterranean sense and it still exists 
today; it will never get lost because of any contingency affecting the destinies of 
people. And yet the presence of Tradition in this sense has not prevented the decline 
of Western civilization. Somebody has correctly remarked that Tradition is a pre¬ 
cious vein, but only a vein. There is a need for other veins; besides, all the veins must 
converge, although only the central and occult vein dominates by going underground? 
Unless the right environment is present, there is no resonance. If the inner and outer 
conditions that allow all human activities to acquire again a meaning are lacking; if 
the people do not ask everything of life and by elevating it to the dignity of a rite and 
an offering do not orient it around a nonhuman axis—then every effort is vain, there 
is no seed that will bear fruit, and the action of an elite remains paralyzed. 

Today, these conditions do not exist. Man, like never before, has lost every 
possibility of contact with metaphysical reality and with everything that is before 
and behind him. It is not a matter of creeds, philosophies, or attitudes; all these things 
ultimately do not matter. As I said at the beginning, in modem man there is a mate¬ 
rialism that, through a legacy of centuries, has become almost a structure and a basic 
trait of his being. This materialism, without modem man being aware of it, kills 
every possibility, deflects eveiy intent, paralyzes every attempt, and damns every 
effort, even those oriented to a sterile, inorganic, artificial construction. The follow¬ 
ing factors contribute to strengthening this yoke: (a) the lifestyle and all the contin¬ 
gencies of daily life from which none of our contemporaries may remove them¬ 
selves; (b) the type of education prevalent today; (c? everything that consciously or 
unconsciously is experienced as a conditioning and an influence originating from the 
environment and from the collective psyche; (d) the idols, prejudices, forms of judg¬ 
ment and feeling of the false conscience and the false action rooted in man’s spirit. 
What is really needed is a total catharsis and a radical “housecleaning” capable of 
liberating man from his false “self,” the things he takes pride in, his works, hopes, 
and fears. Indeed, the tide of “progress” has been very poweiful if this, and nothing 
short of it, is what is needed for a transcendent reference point to be acknowledged 
again and for an absolute, traditional tides to appear again, bestow on everything 
(man included) a new meaning, and reabsorb and redeem in a new purity everything 

1. Guido De Giorgio, “Ascesi e Anli-Europn,” Introduzione alia nmgia, 2.194, 


358 


359 


Revolt Agaiust the ITIoderti UJorld 


Conausion 


that has been profaned and degraded. But if such a work of inner liberation can 
hardly be achieved by single individuals, how could it be conceived for the masses? 
If it is beyond the reach of those who keep playing with the fetishes of science, art, 
history, faith and philosophy, how could it be within reach of the masses caught in 
the web of collectivism and swept away by the omnipotence of the economic and 
technological element, the frenzy of activism, political passions, and everything that 
converges in a demonic ideal of power or illusory and shallow prosperity? 

Moreover, the West seems to be lacking a superior idea capable of becoming 
the basis for a realization of the traditional spirit, and even of an approach to it. 

Among those who have denounced the crisis of the modem world in the most 
uncompromising way, there are some who have put their trust in the possibilities 
inherent in Catholicism. By acknowledging that if the West has ever had an order 
that conformed to tradition it was thanks to the Church, some have thought that 
Europe’s return to a Catholicism integrated with Tradition may be the way leading 
to a revival of the West. And yet, this too is an illusion. 

First of all, how is it possible that Catholicism may have today that strength to 
operate a radical and universal conversion of which it has proved itself unable even 
when there existed material, moral, and intellectual conditions infinitely more ad¬ 
vantageous? Would Catholicism be able to take again that body it lost so many cen¬ 
turies ago, a body that today has taken a life and spirit of its own and that science and 
lay culture have profaned in every fiber? Even when Catholicism formally professes 
the Christian faith, it no longer represents anything essential or decisive in the actual 
lives of both individuals and entire nations. 

It is not a matter of adaptations and of compromises. The “game” of compro¬ 
mises and adaptations has lasted way too long and it did not prevent the decline of 
the West. Either religion becomes unanimous, absolute, and returns to manifest the 
live and operating power of transcendence, or it is nothing. Here too, it is not a matter 
of the possible marginal integrations in the person of this or that exceptional indi¬ 
vidual Catholic. It is only in the bloc of orthodoxy animated by a totally different 
spirit that Catholicism, despite its spurious nature, could theoretically provide a ref¬ 
erence point to many divided and scattered forces. And yet, how could Catholicism 
possibly overcome the partisan and antitraditional exclusivism typical of its doctrine 
nd elevate itself to a superior, metaphysical, and esoteric perspective, capable of 
reeing it from its own limitations? Is it not very obvious that Catholicism today is 
ying to reconcile itself in every way with modem thought and that the ascetical and 
contemplative element in it is increasingly neglected in favor of the moralistic and 
social dimension? Is it not obvious that in the political domain the Church lives day 
by day, dealing with this or that system, and avoids committing itself to any one and 


uncompromising direction, being obsessed with keeping up-to-date and staying on 
top of things, even to the point of engaging in a dialogue with Marxism? 

Spiritually speaking, a tradition that merely amounts to a system of faith, schol¬ 
arly theology, and symbols and rites that are no longer understood in their deepest 
meaning cannot act in a universal and vivifying fashion. Also, it is problematic to 
what degree the Catholic clergy still preserves some of the features of a body that is 
effectively invested with a power “from above.” Materially speaking, within the 
context of European Christianity it would first be necessary to remove the Protestant 
and Orthodox schisms, itself a utopian prerequisite for a rigorous return to the start¬ 
ing point. Moreover, an eventual defensive solidarity of the Christian churches against 
the onslaught of militant antireligious forces should not be mistaken for a reaffirma¬ 
tion of a universal idea. 

Nor should the issue of power be neglected considering the general conditions 
of the last age: what is needed is the presence of a bloc of power (economic, military, 
and industrial) capable of confronting the Eastern and Western forces fighting for 
world domination and capable of creating a dam and a united front. 

Moreover, the idea that the West owes to Catholicism all the elements of Tradi¬ 
tion it ever knew cannot be accepted without specific reservations. The composite 
character of Catholicism should not be forgotten. I have previously remarked that 
wherever this character manifested itself as a force promoting order and hierarchy, 
thus providing a support for European society, this was mainly thanks to the influ¬ 
ences of the Roman-Germanic world. Conversely, whenever the specifically Chris¬ 
tian component triumphed, Catholicism acted in the West in an antitraditional, rather 
than traditional way. The lunar, priestly spirit, its peculiar dualism, the various views 
of Jewish origin that became an integral part of the Christian spirit, all these thing: 
represented in Catholicism an obstacle that prevented the possibility of its infusing 
into Europe a spirituality in conformity with and proper to what I have called the 
Northern Light. Moreover Catholicism has caused the more real forces, after they 
found the way leading upwards obstructed, to flow into the material domain and 
realize in it the characteristic values of the Western soul. It is well-known that it was 
in the terms of a reaction against Catholicism that, beginning with the Renaissance, 
the reaffirmation of man and life took place. This represented an evident deviation 
and yet it was largely precipitated by the context I have just described. 

Thus, overall, it must be said very clearly that those who think they are men o 
Tradition simply by virtue of being inspired by Catholicism do indeed stop halfway, 
and are utterly unable to recognize the first rings in the long chain of causes, and 
are thus blind to the world of the origins and absolute values. It is possible to see 
the two antagonistic yet complementary aspects of the same situation in a Western 


360 


361 



Revolt Hghiiht the IHoDERn UUorld 


Conclusion 


materialism oriented in a virile way and in the presence of a spirituality that cannot 
be separated from the non-Westem, “Southern” elements, and that also lacks the 
superior, metaphysical, and esoteric dimension. 

An analogous structural dualism impairs any attempt at traditional restoration 
before it starts by channeling it in the wrong direction. 

In the actual civilization things are such that any evocation of the spirituality of 
the origins that could remove the impasse, overcome the scission, transport and eh 
evate to the plane of light the powers of action locked in the dark and barbaric world 
of modem greatness would unavoidably have a problematic outcome, much more so 
than it did at the time of the Renaissance. In the modern world, the tendency to 
conceive virility, personality, action, and autonomy in merely material and human 
terms is way too strong. Thus, it is extremely unlikely that a doctrine inspired by the 
original sense that all this had in the light of traditional and transcendent references 
could avoid being brought back to the same terns, and thus not so much transform 
the profane into the sacred, but the other way around. In fact, today, when talking 
about the rights of a sovereign state before the Church, who could conceive anything 
besides the plebeian and lay claims of temporal power against spiritual authority? 
Or anything besides the usurping deeds of the new “superstates” and the new nation¬ 
alist or collectivist mysticisms? When talking today about superindividuality, could 
the mind possibly go beyond the “superman” notion, which is Nietzsche at his worst? 
And again, when someone talks today about the “civilization of action” being a 
possibility as worthy as the “civilization of contemplation,” would not everybody 
recognize in this the triumph in our times of those forms that demonstrate their un¬ 
questionable superiority over any past era by virtue of the mechanical, technologi¬ 
cal, and military superiority that European society has achieved in Jess than a cen¬ 
tury precisely through its cult of action? And even the most recent revival of myths, 
such as the Roman and the Nordic-Germanic myths, and the myths of the race, the 
Aryan spirit, and so on, have they not taken very questionable directions in the con¬ 
text of the political upheavals that have accelerated the final collapses in Europe? 

Therefore we must conclude that the way is doubly blocked. The prison in which 
Western man is confined is one of the worst ever to be devised because it does not 
have walls. It is not easy to get up again when there is nothing on which one can lean 
and push himself up. By increasingly undermining the effective influence of Chris¬ 
tianity and Catholicism, the West is abandoning its last references to a spirituality 
that is not its own; and yet, in the forms that are proper to it, the West is not pure spirit 
and is also unable to create its own spirit. 

Therefore it seems unavoidable that fate will run its course. I have said it be¬ 
fore; it is likely that having reached the penultimate step, and being on the edge of 


the universal advent of the truth and the power of the fourth and last of the ancient 
castes, mankind is ready to enter the last stage and touch the bottom of the Dark Age 
or Iron Age (foretold in traditional teachings), the general features of which largely 
correspond to those of contemporary civilization. 

Just like people, civilizations also undergo their own cycle, consisting of a be¬ 
ginning, a development, and an end; the more they are immersed in what is contin¬ 
gent, the more this law is inescapable. This obviously is not enough to frighten those 
who are rooted in what cannot be altered and what remains as a perennial presence 
by virtue of its being above time. Even though it may be destined to disappear, mod¬ 
em civilization is certainly not the first to become extinct, nor is it the one after which 
none will follow. In the life of what is conditioned by space and time, lights are 
continually being put out and kindled again, cycles end and new ones begin. As I 
have said, the doctrine of the cycles was known to traditional man and only the 
ignorance of modern man has induced him to believe that his civilization, which is 
characterized by the deepest roots in the temporal and contingent element, will en¬ 
joy a different and privileged fate. 

To those who have a vision in conformity with reality, the problem is rather to 
what degree can there be a relationship of continuity between the dying world and 
the world to come; in other words, what elements of the old world will survive and be 
carried forth into the new one? The predominant view in the ancient traditional teach¬ 
ing is that some kind of gap separates one cycle from the next; the new cycle alleg¬ 
edly will be characterized not by a gradual getting up and reconstruction, but by a 
new beginning, a sudden mutation brought about by a divine and metaphysical event 
just like an old tree does not flourish again, but dies and a new tree grows out of it; 
seeds. This view clearly shows that the relationships of continuity between two cycle; 
are only relative and, in any event, do not affect the masses and great structures of a 
civilization. These relationships only concern essential vital elements, much in the 
way the seed is related to the new plant. 

Thus, one of the many illusions that needs to be rejected is the one nourished by 
those who try to see a superordained logic behind the processes of dissolution, and 
who think that somehow the old world had to die in order to bring forth the new world 
toward which mankind is heading. And yet, the only world toward which we are 
heading is simply that which picks up and reassumes in an extreme way that which 
has acted during the phase of destruction. Such a world cannot be the basis for any¬ 
thing meaningful, nor can it provide the material from which traditional values may 
be revived again, precisely because it is the organized and embodied negation of 
these values. There is no future, in the positive sense of the word, for modern civili¬ 
zation as a whole. Thus, it is a mere fancy harbored by those who dream about a goal 


362 


363 



Revolt A&miw the IHoderu UJorld 


Conausion 


and a future that somehow may justify what man has destroyed both inside and 
outside himself. 

The possibilities still available in the last times concern only a minority and may 
be distinguished as follows. Beside the great “currents” of the world there are still 
individuals who are rooted in terra firma. Generally speaking, they are unknown 
people who shun the spotlight of modern popularity and culture. They live on spiri¬ 
tual heights; they do not belong to this world. Though they are scattered over the 
earth and often ignorant of each other’s existence, they are united by an invisible 
bond and form an unbreakable chain in the traditional spirit. This nucleus does not 
act: it only exercises the function to which the symbolism of the “perennial fire” 
corresponded. By virtue of these people, Tradition is present despite all; the flame 
bums invisibly and something still connects the world to the superworld. They are 
those who are awake, whom in Greek are called the zypfjyopoL 

There are an increasing number of individuals who experience a confused and 
yet real need for liberation, though they do not know in the name of what. To orient 
these people, and shield them from the spiritual dangers of the actual world, to lead 
them to see the truth and shaipen their will to join the ranks of the first type of 
people is what can still be done. And yet this too affects only a minority, and we 
should not delude ourselves that in this way there will be sizeable changes in the 
overall destinies of the multitudes. In any event, this is the only justification for 
angible action that can be carried out by men of Tradition living in the modem 
vvorld, in a milieu with which they have no connection. In order for the 
abovementioned guiding action to be successful it is necessary to have “watchers” 
at hand who will bear witness to the values of Tradition in ever more uncompro¬ 
mising and firm ways, as the antitraditional forces grow in strength. Even though 
these values today cannot be achieved, it does not mean that they amount to mere 
“ideas.” They are measwes. And when even the elemental capability to measure 
was totally lost, then the last night would surely fall. Let people of our time talk 
about these things with condescension as if they were anachronistic and antihistorical; 
we know that this is an alibi for their defeat. Let us leave modern men to their 
“truths” and let us only be concerned about one thing: to keep standing amid a 
world of ruins. Even though today an efficacious, general, and realizing action 
stands almost no chance at all, the ranks that I mentioned before can still set up 
inner defenses. In an ancient ascetical text it is said that while in the beginning the 
law from above could be implemented, those who came afterward were only ca¬ 
pable of half of what had been previously done; in the last times very few works 
will be done, but for people living in these times the great temptation will arise 
again; those who will endure during this time will be greater than the people of old 


who were very rich in works . 2 To make the values of truth, reality, and Tradition 
highly visible to those who do not want “this” but who confusedly seek something 
“else,” means to offer some reference points so that the great temptation may not 
prevail in everybody in those situations in which matter seems to have become 
stronger than the spirit. 

Finally, we must consider a third possibility. To some the path of acceleration 
may be the most suitable approach to a solution, considering that given certain con¬ 
ditions, many reactions are the equivalent of those cramps that only prolong agony 
and by delaying the end also delay the advent of the new principle. Thus, it would be 
expedient to take on, together with a special inner attitude, the most destructive 
processes of the modem era in order to use them for liberation; this would be like 
turning a poison against oneself or like “riding a tiger .” 3 

When regarding the process of decadence in Western society, I identified 
unrealism as its most typical feature. The individual at a given historical moment 
finds himself to be totally ignorant of spirituality as a reality. He even experiences 
the sense of self in terms of thought and reflection; this amounts to psychologism. 
Eventually his thought and reflection create a world of mirages, phantasms, and 
idols that replace spiritual reality; this is die humanistic myth of culture, which is 
nothing but a cave filled with shadows. Together with the abstract world of thought, 
there arises the romantic world of the “soul.” What emerges are the various crea¬ 
tures of sentimentalism and faith, of individualistic and humanitarian pathos, of sen¬ 
sualism and superfluous heroism, of humility and revolt. And yet we have already 
seen that this unrealistic world is heading to its downfall and that deeper, elemental 
forces have almost swept away the myths of romantic and individualist man in a 
world where “realism” prevails over any idealism or sentimentalism and the “hu¬ 
manistic cult of the soul” is definitely overcome. I have indicated currents that see 
the presuppositions for a new universal civilization in the destruction of the “I” and 
the liberation of man from the “spirit.” 

Regarding the way that has been mentioned, it is necessary to establish up to 
what point it is possible to benefit from such destructive upheavals; up to what point, 
thanks to an inner determination and orientation toward transcendence, may the 
nonhuman element of the modem “realistic” and activist world, instead of being a 
path to the subhuman dimension (as is the case of the majority of the most recent 
forms), foster experiences of a higher life and a higher freedom? 

2. A. Stolz, L’ascesi cristiana (Brescia, 1944), 2, 

3. In my book Cavalcare la Ligre I have attempted to outline Lhe existential orientations that may serve this 
purpose during an age of dissolution. 


364 


365 


Revolt Agaitist the Modem UUorld 


This is all we can say about a certain category of men in view of the fulfillment 
of the times, a category that by virtue of its own nature must be that of a minority. 
This dangerous path may be trodden. It is a real test. In order for it to be complete in 
its resolve it is necessary to meet the following conditions: all the bridges are to be 
cut, no support found, and no returns possible; also, the only way out must be forward. 

It is typical of a heroic vocation to face the greatest wave knowing that two 
destinies lie ahead: that of those who will die with the dissolution of the modem 
world, and that of those who will find themselves in the main and regal stream of the 
new current. 

Before the vision of the Iron Age, Hesiod exclaimed: “May I have not been born 
in it!” But Hesiod, after all, was a Pelasgic spirit, unaware of a higher vocation. For 
other natures there is a different truth; to them applies the teaching that was also 
known in the East : 4 although the Kali Y uga is an age of great destructions, those who 
live during it and manage to remain standing may achieve fruits that were not easily 
achieved by men living in other ages. 


4. See the VifQu Purina, 6.2. 


366 


Appendix: On the Dark Age 


I n reference to what I previously said concerning what ancient traditions called the 
Dark Age (Kali Yuga), I will now describe some of the features of this age found 
in an ancient Hindu text, the VisnuPurana. I will putin brackets what I consider to be 
the contemporary applications . 1 

Outcastes and barbarians will be masters of the banks of the Indus, 

Darvika, the Chandrabhaga and Kashmir. These will all be contempo¬ 
rary rulers [of this age] reigning over the earth: kings [rulers] of violent 
temper .. . They will seize upon the property of their subjects; they will 
be of limited power and will for the most part rapidly rise and fall; their 
lives will be short, their desires insatiable, and they will display but 
little piety. The people of various countries intermingling with them 
will follow their example. . . . The prevailing caste will be the Shudra 
. . . Vaisyas will abandon agriculture and commerce and gain a liveli¬ 
hood by servitude or the exercise of mechanical arts [proletarization 
and industrialization] . . . Kshyatrias instead of protecting will plunder 
their subjects: and under the pretext of levying customs will rob mer¬ 
chants of their property [crisis of capitalism and of private property; 
socialization, nationalization, and communism] .. . Wealth [inner] and 
piety [following one’s dharma] will decrease day by day until the whole 
world will be wholly depraved. Then property alone will confer rank 
[the quantity of dollars—economic classes]; wealth [material] will be 
the only source of devotion; passion will be the sole bond of union be¬ 
tween the sexes; falsehood will be the only means of success in litiga¬ 
tion. . . , 

Earth will be venerated but for its mineral treasures [unscrupulous 
exploitation of the soil, demise of the cult of the earth] . . . 

Brahmanical clothes will constitute a Brahman . . . weakness will 

1. [The passages that follow are taken from the English translation of the Vi$nu Puriina, by H. Wilson (Lon¬ 
don, 1868), 4.24; 6.1.] 


367 


Revolt against the (Hodem UUorld 


be the cause of dependence [cowardice, death of fides and honor in the 
modern political forms] . . . simple ablution [devoid of the power of 
the true rite] will be purification [can there really be anything more in 
the alleged salvation procured by the Christian sacraments?] . . . 

In the Kali age men corrupted by unbelievers ... will say: “Of what 
authority are the Vedas? what are gods or Brahmans? ...” 

Observance of caste, order and institutes [traditional] will not pre¬ 
vail in the Kali age. Marriages in this age will not be comformable to 
the ritual, nor will the rules that connect the spiritual preceptor and his 
disciple be in force. ... A regenerated man will be initiated in any way 
whatever [democracy applied to the spiritual plane] and such acts of 
penance as may be performed will be unattended by any results [this 
refers to a “humanistic” and conformist religion] . . . all orders of life 
will be common alike to all persons. . . . 

He who gives away much money will be the master of men and 
family descent will no longer be a title of supremacy [the end of tradi¬ 
tional nobility, advent of bourgeoisie, plutocracy]. .. . 

Men will fix their desires upon riches, even though dishonestly ac¬ 
quired. ... Men of all degrees will conceit themselves to be equal with 
Brahmans [the prevarication and presumption of the intellectuals and 

modern culture]-The people wilLbe almost always in dread of dearth 

and apprehensive of scarcity; and will hence ever be watching the ap¬ 
pearances of the sky [the meaning of the religious and superstitious 
residues typical of modern masses]. . . . 

The women will pay no attention to the commands of their hus¬ 
bands or parents. . . . They will be selfish, abject and slatternly; they 
will be scolds and liars; they will be indecent and immoral in their con¬ 
duct and will ever attach themselves to dissolute men. . . . 

Men having deviated into heresy, iniquity will flourish, and the 
duration of life will therefore decrease . 2 

Nevertheless, in the Visnu Purana there are also references to elements of the pri¬ 
mordial or “Manu’s” race that have been preserved in this Dark Age in order to be 
the seed of new generations; what appears again is the well-known idea of a new 
and final epiphany “from above”