Chapter I 


GLASS SOCIETY AND THE STATE 

1. THE STATE AS THE PRODUCT OF THE IRRECONCU.ABILITY 
OF CLASS ANTAGONISMS 

What is now happening to Marx’s doctrine has, in the course ot 
history, often happened to the doctrines of other revolutionary 
thinkers and leaders of oppressed classes Struggling for emancipa- 
tion. During the lifetime of great revolutionaries, the oppressing 
classes hound them constantly, attack their doctrines with the most 
savage malice, the most furious hatred and the mofet unscrupulous 
campaign of lies and slander. After their death, attempts are made 
to convert them into harmless icons, to canonise them, so to say, 
and to surround their names with a certain halo for the ‘‘consola- 
tion” of the oppressed classes and with the object of duping them, 
while at the same time emasculating the revolutionary doctrine 
of its content, vulgarizing it and blunting its revolutionary edge. At 
the present time, the bourgeoisie and the opportunists in the labour 
movement concur in this revision of Marxism. They omit, obliterate 
■'Sh’d' distort the revolutionary side of its doctrine, its revolutionarv 
Soul. They push to the foreground and extol what is or seems ac- 
ceptable to the bourgeoisieL^li^ll the social-chauvinists are now 
“Marxists” (don’t laugh!). And more and more frequently, Ger- 
man bourgeois scholars, erstwhile specialists in the extermination 
of Marxism, are speaking of the “national-German” Marx, who. 


n 



12 


V J. LE-N1^ 


they aver, trained the labour unions which are so splendidly or- 
ganized for the purpose of conducting a predatory war! 

In teuch circumstances, in view of the incredibly widespread 
nature of the distortions of Marxism, our first task is to restore 
the true doctrine of Marx on the state. For this purpose it will 
be necessary to quote at length from the works of Marx and 
Engels. Of course, long quotations will make the text cumbersome 
and will not help to make it popular reading, but we cannot pos- 
sibly avoid them. All, or at any rate, all the most essential passages 
in the works of Marx and Engels on the subject of the state must ne- 
cessarily be given as fully as possible, in order that the reader may 
form an independent opinion on the totality of views of the found- 
ers of scientific Socialism and on the development of those views, 
and in order that their distortion by the now prevailing “Kaut- 
skyism” may be documentarily proved and clearly demonstrated. 

Let us begin with the most popular of Engels’ works, The 
Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the Slate, the sixth 
edition of which was published in Stuttgart as far back as 1894. 
We must translste the quotations from the German originals, as 
the Russian translations, although very numerous, are for the most 
part either incomplete or very unsatisfactory. 

Summing up his historical analysis, Engels says: 

‘‘The state is therefore by no means a power imposed on 
society from the outside; just as little ite it ‘the reality of the 
moral idea,’ ‘the image and reality of reason,’ as Hegel asserts. 
Rather, it is a product of society at a certain stage of develop- 
ment; it is the admission that this society has become entangled 
in an insoluble contradiction with iteelf, that it is cleft into 
irreconcilable antagonisms, which it is powerless to dispel. But 
in order that these antagonisms, classes with conflicting eco- 
nomic interests, might not consume theinselves and society in 



THE STATE AND DEVOLUTION 


13 


Sterile struggle, a power apparently standing above society be- 
came necessary for the purpose of moderating the conflict and 
keeping it within the bounds of ‘order’; and this power, aris- 
ing out of society, but placing itself above it, and increasingly 
alienating itself from it, is the state” (pp. 177-178 of the sixth 
German edition) . 

This fully expresses the basic idea of Marxism on the question 
of the historical role and meaning of the state. The state is the 
product and the manifestation of the irreconcilabilily of class an- 
tagonisms. The state arises when, where and to the extent that class 
antagonisms cannot be objectively reconciled. And, conversely, the 
exisfence of the state proves that the class antagonisms are irre- 
concilable. 

It is precisely on this most important and fundamental point 
that (distortions of Marxism, proceeding along two main lines, begin. 

On the one hand, the bourgeois ideologists, and particularly 
the petty-bourgeois ideologists, compelled by the pressure of in- 
disputable historical facts to admit that the state only exists where 
there are class antagonisms and the class struggle, “correct” Marx 
in a way that makes it appear that the state is an organ for the 
conciliation of classes. According to Marx, the slate could neither 
arise nor continue to exist if it were possible to conciliate classes. 
According to the petty-bourgeois and philistine professors and pub- 
licists — frequently on the strength of well-meaning references to 
Marx! — the state conciliated classes. According to Marx, the state 
-Org an of class rjile^-an organ for the oppression of one class 
by another; it creates “order,”^ which legalizes and perpetuates this 
oppression by moderating the collisions between the classes. In 
the opinion of the petty-bourgeoid politicians, order means the con- 
ciliation of classes, aryd not the oppression of one class by anotHfer ; 
to moderate collisions means cogciliating and not depriving the 



14 


V. I. LENIN 


oppressed classes of definite means and methods of fighting to over- 
throw the oppressor^. 

For instance, when, in the Revolution of 1917, the question 
of the real meaning and role of the state arose in all its magnitude 
as a practical question demanding immediate action on a wide mass 
scale, all the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks immediately 
and completely sank to the petty-bourgeois theory that the “state” 
“conciliated” classes. Innumerable resolutions and articles by pol- 
iticians of both these parties are thoroughly saturated with this 
purely petty-hourgeois and philistine “conciliation” theory. The 
fact that the state is the organ of the rule of a definite class which 
cannot be reconciled with its antipode (the class opposite to it), 
this the petty-bourgeois democrats will never be able to understand. 
Their attitude towards the state is one of the most striking proofs 
that our Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks are not Socialists 
at all (which we Bolsheviks have always maintained), but petty- 
bourgeois democrats with near-Socialist phraseology. 

On the othej; hand, the “Kautskyite” distortion of Marxism is 
far more subtle. “Theoretically,” it is not denied that the fetate is 
the organ of class rule, or that class antagonisms are irreconcilable. 
But what is lost sight of or glossed over is this; if the state is the 
product of irreconcilable class antagonidms, if it is a power stand- 
ing above society and “increasingly alienating itself 
from it,” it is elear that the liberation of the oppressed class is 
impossible not only without a violent revolution, but also 
without the destruction oi the apparatus of state power 
which was created by the ruling clasd and which is the embodiment' 
of this “alienation.” As we shall see later, Marx very definitely 
drew this theoretically self-evident conclusion from a concrete 
historical analysis of the tasks of the revolution. And — as we shall 
show fully in our subsequent remarks — it -^is precisely this con- 
clusion which Kautsky . . . has “forgotten” and distorted. 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


16 


2. SPECIAL BODIES OF ARMED MEN, PRISONS, ETC. 

* 

Engels conrinues ; 

■‘As against the ancient gentile organization, the primary dis- 
tinguishing feature of the state is the division of the subjects of the 
state according to territory.'’ 

Such a division seems “natural” to us, but it cost a prolonged 
struggle against the old form of tribal or gentile society. 

. . The second is the establishment of a public power, 
which is 'no longer directly identical with the population organ- 
izing itself as an armed power. This special public power is 
necessary, because a self-acting armed organization of the pop- 
ulation has become impossible since the cleavage into class- 
es. .. . This public power exists in every state; it consists not 
merely of armed men, but of material appendages, prison^ and 
coercive institutions of all kinds, of which gentile society knew 
nothing. ...” , 

Engels further elucidates the concept of the “power” which is 
termed the state — a power which arises from society, but which 
places itself above it and becomes more and more alienated from 
it. What does this power mainly consist of? It consists of special 
bodies of armed men which have prisons, etc., at their disposal. 

We are justified in speaking of special bodies of armed men, 
because the public power which is an attribute of every state is 
not “directly identical” with the armed population, with its “self- 
acting armed organization.” 

Like all the great revolutionary thinkers, Engelte tries to draw 
the attention of the class-conscious workers to the very fact which 
prevailing philistinism regards as least worthy of attention, as “the 
most common and sanctified, not^only by long standing, but one 



16 


S'. I. LENIN 


might say by petrified prejudices. A standing army and police are 
the chief instruments of state power. But can it be otherwise^ 

From the point of viesv of the vast majority of Europeans of 
the end of the nineteenth century whom Engels was addressing, and 
who have not lived through or closely observed a single great rev- 
olution, it cannot be otherwise. They completely fail to understand 
what a “self-acting armed organization of the population” is. To 
the question, whence arose the need for special bodies of armed 
men. standing above society and becoming alienated from it (po- 
lice and standing army) . the West European and Russian philistines 
are inclined to answer with a few phrases borrowed from Spencer* 
or Mikhailovsky,** by referring to the complexiU^ of social life, 
the differentiation of functions, and so forth. 

Such a reference seems “scientific”; it effectively dulls the 
senses of the man in the street and obscures the most important and 
liasic fact, namely, the cleavage of .society into irreconcilably an- 
tagonistic cla.sses. 


Had this cleavage not existed, the “self-acting armed organ- 
ization of the population” might have differed from the primitive 
organization of a tribe of monkeys grasping sticks, or of primitive 
man, or of men united in a tribal form of society, by its com- 
plexity, its high technique, and so forth; but it would still have 
been pofesible. 

It is impossible now, because civilized society is divided into 
antagonistic and. indeed, irreconcilably antagonistic classes, the 
“self-acting” arming of which would lead to an armed struggle 


* Herbert Spencer (1820-1903) — Knglish bourgeois sociologist. According 
to the Spencerian theory the state originated not as a result of the appear- 
ance of classes and the class struggle, but in consequence of “the complexity 
of social life.” — Ed. 

N. K. Mikhailovsky (1842-1904) — ^ideologist j)f Narodism (Populism), 
a trend in the Russian soeial and political movement hostile to Marxism. 
Exponent nf the so-called “snbiectiw method in sociology.” — Ed. 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


17 


I between tliem. A state arises, a special force is created in the form ‘ 
of Special bodies of armed men, and every revolution, by destroy- 1 
.ing the state apparatus, demonstrates to us how the ruling class 1 
I strives to restore the special bodies of armed men which serve i t, ' 
Und how the oppressed class strivefe to create a new organization of 
'this kind, capable of serving not tlie exploiters but the exploited. 

In the above argument, Engels raises theoretically the very 
question which every great revolution raises practically, palpably 
and on a mass scale of action, namely, the question of the relation 
between “special” bodies of armed men and the “self-acting armed 
organization of the population.” We shall see how this is concretely 
illustrated by the experience of the European and Russian revolu- 
tions. 

But let us return to Engels’ exposition. 

He points out that sometimes, in certain parts of North Amer- 
ica, for example, this public power is weak (he has in mind a 
rare exception in capitalist society, and parts of North America in 
its pre-imperialist days where the free colonist predominated), but 
that in general it grows stronger: 

. . .“It [the public power] grows stronger, however, in pro- 
portion as the class antagonisms within the state become more 
acute, and with the growth in size and population of the ad- 
jacent states. We have only to look at our present-day Europe, 
where clasS struggle and rivalry in conquest have screwed up 
the public power to such a pitch that it threatens to devour the 
whole of society and even the state itself. . . .” 

This was written no later than the beginning of the nineties 
of the last century, Engels’ last preface being dated June 16, 1891. 
The turn towards imperialism — meaning by that the complete dom- 
ination of the trusts, the omnipotence of the big banks, a colonial 



18 


V. I. LENIN 


policy on a grand Scale, and so forth — was only just beginning in 
France, and was even weaker in North America and in Germany. 
Since then “rivalry in conquest” has made gigantic strides — espe- 
cially as, by the beginning of the second decade of the twentieth 
century, the whole world had been finally divided up among these 
“rivals in conquest,” i.e., among the great predatory powers. Since 
then, military and naval armaments have grown to monstrous pro- 
portions, and the predatory war of 1914-17 for the domination of 
the world by England or Germany, for the division of the spoils, 
has brought the “devouring” of all the forces of society by the 
rapacious state power to the verge of complete catastrophe. 

As early as 1891 Engels was able to point to “rivalry in con- 
quest” as one of the most important distinguishing features of the 
foreign policy of the Great Powers, but in 1914-17, when thife 
rivalry, many times intensified, has given rise to an imperialist 
war, the social-chauvinist scoundrels cover up the defence of the 
predatory interests of “their own” bourgeoisie with phrases like 
“defence of the fatherland,” “defence of the republic and the rev- 
olution,” etc.! 

3 . THE STATE AS AN INSTRUMENT FOR THE EXPLOITATION 
OF THE OPPRESSED CLASS 

For the maintenance of a special public power standing above 
society, taxes and btate loans are needed. 

“. . . Possessing the public power and the right to exact 
taxes, the officials” — Engels writes — “now exist as organs of 
society standing above society. The free, voluntary respect 
which was accorded to the organs of the gentile organization 
doefe not satisfy them, even if they could have it. . . .” 

Special laws are enacted proclaiming the sanctity and immunity 
of the officials. “The shabbiest police servant . . . has more 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


19 


‘authority’ than all the representatives of the tribe put together, but 
even the head of the military power of a civilized state may well 
envy a tribal chief the “unfeigned and undisputed respect the latter 
enjoys.” 

Here the question of the privileged position of the officials as 
organs of state power is stated. The main point indicated is: what 
puts them above society? We shall see how this theoretical problem 
was solved in practice by the Paris Commune in 1871 and how it 
was slurred over in a reactionary manner by Kautsky in 1912. 

“. . . As the state arose out of the need to hold class antag- 
onisms in check, but as it, at the same time, arose in the midst 
of the conflict of these classes, it is, as a rule, the state of the 
most powerful, economically dominant class, which through the 
medium of the state became also the dominant class politically, 
and thus acquired new means of holding down and exploiting 
the oppressed class. • . .” 

It was not only the ancient and feudal slates ^jhat were organs 
for the exploitation of the slaves and serfs but 

“. . . the contemporary representative state is an instrument 
of exploitation of wage labour by capital. By way of exception, 
however, periods occur when the warring classes are so nearly 
balanced that the state power, ostensibly appearing as a medi- 
ator, acquires, for the moment, a certain independence in rela- 
tion to both. . . .” 

Such, for instance, were the absolute monarchies of the seven- 
teenth and eighteenth centuries, the Bonapartism of the First and 
Second Empires in France, and the Bismarck regime in Germany. 

Such, we add, is the present Kerensky government in republican 
Russia Since it began, to persecute the revolutionary proletariat,’ at 
a moment when, thanks to the leadership of the petty-bourgeois 



20 


V. L LEMIN 


democrats, tlie Soviets have already become impotent vfhile the bour- 
geoisie is not yet strong enough openly to disperse them. 

“In a democratic republic,” Engels continues, “wealth wields 
its power indirectly, but all the more efiectively,” first, by means 
of the “direct corruption of the officials” (America) ; second by 
means of “the alliance between the government and the Stock Ex- 
change” (France and America). 

At the present time, imperialism and the domination of the 
banks have “developed” both these methods of defending and as- 
serting the omnipotence of wealth in democratic republics of all 
descriptions to an unusually fine art. For instance, in the very first 
months of the Russian democratic republic, one might say during 
the honeymoon of ffie union of the “Socialist” S.-R.’s [Socialist- 
Revolutionaries] and the Mensheviks with the bourgeoisie, Mr. 
Palchinsky, in the coalition government,* obstructed every measure 
intended to restrain the capitalists and their marauding practices, 
their plundering of the public treasury on war contracts. When later 
on Mr. Palchinsky resigned (and, of course, was replaced by just 
such another Palchinsky), the capitalists “rewarded” him with a 
“soft” job and a salary of 120,000 rubles per annum. What would 
you call this — direct or indirect corruption? An alliance between 
the government and the syndicates, or “only” friendly relations? 
What role do the Chernovs, Tseretelis, Avksentyevs and Skobelevs 
play? Are they the “direct” or only the indirect allies of the mil- 
lionaire treasury looters? 

The omnipotence of “wealth” b thus more secure in a democrat- 
ic republic, since it does not depend on the faulty political shell 
of capitalism. A democratic republic is the best possible political 

* The Coalition Government — ^the government formed on May 5, 1917, 
i.e.', two months after the overthrow of tsarism in February 1917. In addition 
to capitalist ministers, the Mensheviks Skobelev” and Tsereteli, and the 
Socialist-Revolutionaries Chernov and Kerensky, and others, were members 
of it. — Ed, 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


21 


shell for capitalism, and, therefore, once capital has gained control 
of this very best shell (through the Palchinskys, Chernovs, Tsere- 
telis and Co.), it establishes its power so securely, so firmly, that 
no change, either of persons, of institutions, or of parties in the 
bourgeois-democratic republic, can shake it. 

We must also note that Engels very definitely calls universal 
suffrage an instrument of bourgeois rule. Universal suffrage, he 
says, obviously summing up the long experience of German Social- 
Democracy, is 

“. . . an index of the maturity of the working class. It 
cannot and never will be anything more in the modern state.” 

The petty-bourgeois democrats, such as our Socialist-Revolu- 
tionaries and Mensheviks, and also their twin brothers, the social- 
chauvinists and opportunists of Western Europe, all expect “more” 
from -universal suffrage. They themselves share and instil into the 
minds of the people the wrong idea that universal suffrage “in the 
modern state” is really capable of expressing the will of the ma- 
jority of the toilers and of ensuring its realization. 

Here we can only note this wrong idea, only point out that 
Engels’ perfectly clear, precise and concrete statement is distorted at 
every step in the propaganda and agitation conducted by the “of- 
ficial” (i.e., opportunist) Socialist parties. A detailed elucidation of 
the utter falsity of this idea, which Engels brushes aside, is given in 
our further account of the views of Marx and Engels on the 
“modern” state. 

Engels gives a general summary of his views in the most pop- 
ular of his works in the following words: 

“The state, therefore, has not existed from all eternity. 
There have been societies which managed without it, which had 
no conception of the state and slate power. At a certain stjge 
of economic development, which was necessarily bound up with 



22 


V. I. LENIH 


the cleavage of society into classes, the state became a neces- 
sity owing to this cleavage. We are now rapidly approaching 
a stage in the development of production at which the exist- 
ence of these classes has not only ceafeed to be a necessity, but 
is becoming a positive hindrance to production. They will fall 
as inevitably as they arose at an earlier stage. Along with them, 
the state will inevitably fall. The society that organizes produc- 
tion anew on the basis of the free and equal association of the 
producers will put the whole State machine where it will then 
belong: in the museum of antiquities, side by side with the 
spinning wheel and the bronze axe.” 

We do not often come across this passage in the propaganda 
and agitation literature of present-day Social-Democracy. But even 
when we do come across it, it is generally quoted in the same 
manner as one bows before an icon, i.e., it is done merely to Show 
official respect for Engels, and no attempt is made to gauge the 
breadth and depth of the revolution that this relegating of “the 
whole state machine ... to the museum of antiquities” presupposes. 
In most cases we do not even find an understanding of what Engels 
calls the fetate machine. 

4. THE “WITHERING AWAY” OF THE STATE 
AND VIOLENT REVOLUTION 

Engels’ words regarding the “withering away” of the state are 
so widely known, they are so often quoted, and they reveal the 
significance of the customary painting of Marxism to look like op- 
portunism so clearly that we must deal with them in detail. We 
shall quote the whole passage from which they are taken. 

'- “The proletariat seizes the state power and transforms^he 
means of production in the ^rst instance into state property. 



THE STATE AND BEVOLUllON 


23 


But in doing this, it puts an end to itself as the proletariat, it 
puts an end to all class differences and class antagonism^, it 
puts an end also to the state as the state. Former society, mov- 
ing in class antagonisms, had need of the state, that is, an or- 
ganization of the exploiting elates at each period for the main- 
tenance of its external conditions of production; that is, there- 
fore, for the forcible holding down of the exploited class in the 
conditions of oppression (slavery, villeinage or serfdom, wage 
labour) determined by the existing mode of production. The 
state was the official representative of society as a whole, its 
embodiment in a visible corporation; but it was thite only in so 
far as it was the state of that class which itself, in its epoch, 
represented society as a whole; in ancient times, the state of the 
slave-owning citizens; in the Middle Ages, of the feudal nobil- 
ity; in our epoch, of the bourgeoisie. When ultimately it be- 
comes really repreteentative of society as a whole, it makes it- 
self superfluous. As soon as there is no longer any class of 
society to be held in subjection; as soon as, along with class 
domination and the struggle for individual Existence bateed on 
the former anarchy of production, the collisions and excesses 
arising from these have also been abolished, there is nothing 
more to be repressed, which would make a special repressive 
force, a state, necesteary. The first act in which the state really 
comes forward as the representative of society as a whole — the 
taking possession of the means of production in the name of 
society — is at the same time its last independent act as a state. 
The interference of the tetate power in social relations becomes 
superfluous in one sphere after another, and then ceases of it- 
self. The government of persons is replaced by the admin- 
istration of things and the direction of the process of produc- 
tion. The stale is not ‘abolished,’ it withers away. It is ^om 
this tetandpoint that we must appraise the phrase ‘free people’s 



V. I. LENIM 


2-i 


State’ — both its justification at times for agitational purposes, 
and its ultimate scientific inadequacy — and also the demand of 
the so-called anarchists that the state should be abolished over- 
night” (//err Eugen Diilirings Revolution in Science [Anti- 
Diiliring], pp. 314-15 of the English edition). 

It may be said without fear of error that of thite argument of 
Engels’ which is so singularly rich in ideas, only one point has 
become an Integral part of Socialist thought among modern Social- 
ist parties, namely, that according to Marx the state “withers away” 
— as distinct from the anarchist doctrine of the “abolition” of the 
state. To emasculate Marxism in such a manner ite to reduce it to 
opportunism, for such an “interpretation” only leaves the hazy 
conception of a slow, even, gradual change, of absence of leaps and 
storms, of absence of revolution. The current, widespread, mass, 
if one may say so, conception of the “withering away” of the state 
undoubtedly means the slurring over, if not the repudiation, of 
revolution. 

Such an “interpretation” is the crudest distortion of Marxism, 
advantageous only to the bourgeoisie; in point of theory, it is based 
on a disregard for the most important circumstances and considera- 
tions pointed out, say, in the “summary” of Engels’ argument we 
have just quoted in full. 

In the first place, Engels at the very outset of his argument 
says that, in assuming state power, the proletariat by that “puts 
an end to the state as the state.” It is not “good form” to ponder 
over what this means. Generally, it is either ignored altogether, or 
it is considered to be a piece of “Hegelian” “weakness” on Engels’ 
part. Ate a matter of fact, however, these words briefly express the 
experience of one of the great proletarian revolutions, the Paris 
Commune of 1871, of which we shall speak in_greater detail in its 
proper place. As a matter of fact, Engels speaks here of “putting 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


26 


an end” to the bourgeois state by the proletarian revolution, while 
the words about its withering away refer to the remnants of the 
proletarian state after the Socialist revolution. According to Engels 
the bourgeois state does not “wither away,” but i's “p ut an end 
t o” by the proletariat in the course of the revolution. What with- 
er away after the revolution is the proletarian state or semi-state. 

Secondly, the state is a “special repressive force.” Engels gives 
this splendid and extremely profound definition here with complete 
lucidity. And from it follow^ that the “special repressive force” 
for the suppression of the proletariat by the bourgeoisie, for the 
suppression of the millions of toilers by a handful of the rich, must 
be superseded by a “special repressive force” for the suppression 
of the bourgeoisie by the proletariat (the dictatortehip of the pro- 
letariat) . This is precisely what is meant by “putting an end to the 
state as the state.” This is precisely the “act” of taking possession 
of the means of production in the name of society. And it is ob- 
vious that such a substitution of one (bourgeois) “special repres- 
sive force” for another (proletarian) “special repressive force” 
cannot possibly take place in the form of “withering away.” 

Thirdly, in regard to the state “withering aw'ay,” and the even 
more expressive and colourful “ceasing of itself,” Engels refers 
quite clearly and definitely to the period after “the state has 
taken possession of the means of production in the name of society,” 
that is, after the Socialist revolution. We all know that the po- 
litical form of the “state” at that lime is the most complete de- 
mocracy. But it never enters the head of any of the opportunists 
who shamelessly distort Marxism that Engels here speaks of d e- 
m o cr acy “withering away,” or “ceasing of itself.” This seems 
very strange at first sight; but it is “unintelligible” only to those 
who have not pondered over the fact that democracy is also a 
slate and that, consequently, democracy will also disappear when 
the state disappears.'' Revolution alone can “put an end” to the 



V. I. LENIK 


•2fi 


bourgeois state. The state in general, i.e., the most complete de- 
mocracy, can only “wither away.” 

Fourthly, after formulating his famous proposition that “the 
state withers away,” Engels at once explains concretely that this 
proposition is directed equally against the opportunists and the 
anarchists. In doing this, however, Engels puts in the forefront the 
conclusion deduced from the proposition, the “state withers away,” 
which is directed against the opportunists. 

One can wager that out of every 10,000 persons who have 
read or heard about the “withering away” of the state, 9,990 do 
not know, or do not remember, that Engels did not direct the 
conclusions he deduced from this proposition against the anarchists 
alone. Of the remaining ten, probably nine do not know the mean- 
ing of “free people’s state” or why an attack on this watchword con- 
tains an attack on the opportunists. This is how history is written! 
This is how a great revolutionary doctrine is imperceptibly falsified 
and adapted to prevailing philistinism! The conclusion drawn 
against the anarchists has been repeated thousands of times, vulgar- 
ized, dinned intfi people’s heads in the crudest fashion and has 
acquired the strength of a prejudice; whereas the conclusion drawn 
against the opportunists has been hushed up and “forgotten”! 

The “free people’s state” was a program demand and a popu- 
lar slogan of the German Social-Democrats in the ’seventies. The 
only political content of this slogan is a pompous philistine de- 
scription of the concept democracy. In so far as it hinted in a law- 
ful manner at a democratic republic, Engels was prepared to 
“justify” its use “for a time” from an agitational point of view. 
But it was an opportunist felogan, for it not only expressed an 
embellishment of bourgeois democracy, but also a lack of under- 
standing of the Socialist criticism of the state in general. We are 
in favour of a democratic republic as th^ best form of state for 
the proletariat under capitalism; but we have no right to forget 

O 



THE STATE AND HEVOLUTION 


87 


that wage-slavery is the lot of the people even in the most democ- 
ratic bourgeois republic. Furthermore, every slate is a “Special rep- 
ressive force” for the suppression of the oppressed class. Conse- 
quently, no state is a “free” or a “people’s state.” Marx and Engels 
explained this repeatedly to their party comrades in the ’seventies. 

Fifthly, this very same work of Engels’, of which everyone 
remembers the argument about the “withering away” of the state, 
also contains a disquisition on the significance of violent revolution. 
Engels’ historical analysis of its role becomes a veritable panegyric 
on violent revolution. This “no one remembers”; it ife not good 
form in modern Socialist parties to talk or even think about the 
importance of this idea, and it plays no part whatever in their 
daily propaganda and agitation among the masses. And yet, it is 
inseparably bound up with the “withering away” of the state into 
one harmonious whole. 

Here is Engels’ argument: 

“That force, however, plays yet another role [other than 
that of a diabolical power] in history, a revolutionary role; 
that, in the words of Marx, it is the midwife of every old 
teociety which is pregnant with the new, that it is the instru- 
ment by the aid of which the social movement forces its rva)’ 
through and shatters the dead, fossilized, political forms — of 
this there is not a word in Herr Diihring. It is only with sighs 
and groans that he admits the possibility that force will per- 
haps be necesfeary for the overthrow of the economic system of 
exploitation — unfortunately, because all use of force, forsooth, 
demoralizes the person who uses it. And this in spite of the 
immense moral and spiritual impetus which has resulted from 
every victorious revolution! And this in Germany, where a 
violent collision — which indeed may be forced on the people — 
would at leabt have the advantage of wiping out the servility 



28 


V. I. LENIN 


which has permeated the national consciousness as a result of 
the humiliation of the Thirty Years’ War.* And this person’s 
mode of thought — lifeless, insipid and impotent — claims to 
impose itself on the most revolutionary party which history hate 
known!” (P. 193 of the third German edition, end of Chap. 
IV. Part II.) 

How can this panegyric on violent revolution, which Engels 
insistently brought to the attention of the German Social-Demo- 
crats between 1878 and 1894, i.e., right up to the time of his death, 
be combined wdth the theory of the “withering away” of the state 
to form a single doctrine? 

Usually the two views are combined by means of eclecticism, 
by an unprincipled, or sophistic, arbitrary selection (or a teelection 
to please the powers that be) of one or another argument, and in 
ninety -nine cases out of a hundred (if not more often), it is the 
idea of the “withering away” that is specially emphasized. Eclec- 
ticism is substituted for dialectics — this is the most uteual, the most 
widespread phenomenon to be met rvith in present-day official So- 
cial-Democratic literature on Marxism. This sort of substitution is 
not new, of course, it is observed even in the hitetory of classic 
Greek philosophy. In painting Marxism to look like opportunism, 
the substitution of eclecticism for dialectics is the best method of 
deceiving the masses; it gives an illusory satisfaction; it teeems to 
take into account all sides of the process, all tendencies of develop- 
ment, all the conflicting influences, and so forth, whereas in reality 
it presents no consistent and revolutionary conception of the pro- 
cetes of social development at all. 

* The reference here is to the Thirty Years’ War (161848) which 
began in Germany as a struggle of the German feudal princes against the 
power of the emperor. Subsequently, however, due to the fact that the 
majority of the European countries became involved in the struggle, the 
war j took on an international character. The Thirty Years’ War led to the 
further political dismemberment of Germany, besides despoiling and 
devastating the country to an extrenie degree. — Ed. 



THC STATE AND REVOLUTION 


29 


We have already said above, and shall show more fully later, 
that the doctrine of Marx and Engels concerning the inevitability 
of a violent revolution refers to the bourgeois slate. The latter 
cannot be superseded by the proletarian state (the dictatorship of 
the proletariat) in the process of “withering away”; as a general 
rule, this can happen only by means of a violent revolution. The 
panegyric Engels sang in its honour, and which fully corresponds 
to Marx's repeated declarations (recall the concluding passages of 
The Poverty of Philosophy and The Communist Manifesto, with 
their proud and open declaration of the inevitability of a violent 
revolution ; recall Marx’s Critique of the Gotha Program* of 1875, 
in which, almost thirty years later, he mercilessly castigates the 
opportunist character of that program) — this panegyric is by no 
means a mere “impulse,” a mere declamation or a polemical sally. 
The necessity of systematically imbuing the masses with this and 
precisely this view of violent revolution lies at the root of the 
whole of Marx’s and Engels’ doctrine. The betrayal of their doc- 
trine by the social-chauvinist and Kautekyan trends which now 
predominate is brought out in striking relief by the neglect of 
such propaganda and agitation by both these trends. 

The substitution of the proletarian state for the bourgeois 
state is impossible without a violent revolution. The abolition of 
the proletarian state, i.e., of the state in general, is impossible ex- 
cept through the process of “withering away.” 

Marx and Engels fully and concretely enlarged on these views 
in studying each revolutionary situation separately, in analysing 
the lessons of the experience of each individual revolution. We 
shall now proceed to discuSs this, undoubtedly the most important 
part of their doctrine. 

* Gotha Program — the program of the Social-Democratic Party of 
Germany adopted at the Gotha Congress in 1875. — Ed. 



Chapter II 


THE STATE AND REVOLUTION. 

THE EXPERIENCE OF 1848-51 

1. THE EVE OF THE REVOLUTION 

The first works of mature Marxism — The Poverty of Philos- 
ophy and The Communist Manifesto — appeared on the eve of the 
Revolution of 1848. For this reason, in addition to presenting the 
general principles of Marxism, they reflect to a certain degree the 
concrete revolutionary situation of the time. Hence, it will be more 
expedient, perhaps, to examine what the authors of these works 
said about the state immediately before they drew conclusions from 
the experience of the years 1848-51. 

In The Poverty of Philosophy Marx wrote: 

“The working class in the course of its development will 
substitute for the old civil society an association which will 
exclude classes and their antagonism, and there will be no more 
political power properly so-called, teince political power is 
precisely the official expression of class antagonism in civil 
society” (p. 182 of the German edition of 1885). 

It is instructive to compare this general statement of the 
idea of the state disappearing after classes have been abolished 
with the statement contained m.J'he Communist Manifesto, writ- 


30 



THE STATE AND REVOUTnOB 


31 


ten by Marx and Engels a few months later — to be exact, in 
November 1847: 

“In depicting the most general phases of the development 
of the proletariat, we traced the more or less veiled civil war, 
raging within existing society, up to the point where that war 
breaks out into open revolution, and where the violent over- 
throw of the bourgeoisie lays the foundation for the sway of 
the proletariat. . . . 

. .We have seen above that the first step in the revolu- 
^on by the working class te to raise the proletariat to the po- 
sition of ruling class, to win the battle of democracy. 

“The proletariat will use its political supremacy to wrest, 
by degrees, all capital from the bourgeoisie, to centralize all 
instruments of production in the hands of the state, i.e., of the 
proletariat organized as the ruling class; and to increase the 
total of productive forces as rapidly as possible” (pp. 31 and 
37 of the seventh German edition of 1906). 

Here we have a formulation of one of the most remarkable and 
most important ideas of Marxism on the subject of the state, name- 
ly, the idea of the “dictatorship of the proletariat” (as Marx 
and Engels began t,o call it after the Paris Commune) ; and also 
a very interesting definition of the slate which also belongs to the 
category of the “forgotten words” of Marxism; “the state,” i.e., 
“the proletariat organized as the ruling class.” 

This definition of the state has never been explained in the 
prevailing propaganda and agitation literature of the official So- 
cial-Democratic parties. More than that, it has been forgotten, for 
it is absolutely irreconcilable with reformilsm, and is a slap in the 
face of the common opportunist prejudices and philistine illusions 
about the “peaceful development, of democracy.”' 



32 


V t. LENIN 


The proletariat needs the state — ^this is repeated by all the 
opportunists, social-chauvinists and Kautskyites, who assure us that 
this is what Marx taught. But they “forget” to add that, in the 
first place, according to Marx, the proletariat needs only a state 
which is withering away, i.e., a state so constituted that it begins 
to wither away immediately, and cannot but wither away. Secondly, 
the toilers need a “state,” i.e., “the proletariat organized as the 
ruling class.” 

The state is a special organization of force; jt is the organ- 
ization of violence for the suppression of some class. What class 
must the proletariat suppress? Naturally, only the exploiting class, 
i.e., the bourgeoisie. The toilers need a state only to overcome the 
resistance of the exploiters, and only the proletariat can direct 
this suppression, carry it out; for the proletariat is the only class 
that is consistently revolutionary, the only claSs that can unite 
all the toilers and the exploited in the struggle against the bour- 
geoisie, in completely displacing it. 

The exploiting classes need political rule in order to maintain 
exploitation, i.e., in the selfish interests of an insignificant minority 
and against the interests of the vafel majority of the people. The 
exploited classes need political rule in order completely to abolish 
all exploitation, i.e., in the interests of the vast majority of the 
people, and against the interests of the insignificant minority con- 
sisting of the modern slave-owners — the landlords and the capi- 
talists. 

The petty-bourgeois democrats, those alleged Socialists who 
substituted dreams of class harmony for the class struggle, even 
pictured the Socialist reformation in a dreamy fashion — not in the 
form of the overthrow of the rule of the exploiting class, but in 
the form of the peaceful submission of the minority to the major- 
ity which has become conscious of its aims. This petty-bourgeois 
utopia, which is inseparably bopnd up with the idea of the state 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


33 


being above classes, led in practice to the betrayal of the interests 
of the toiling classed, as was shown, for example, by the history 
of the French revolutions of 1848 and 1871, and by the “Social- 
ists” joining bourgeois cabinets in England, France, Italy and 
other countries at the end of the nineteenth and the beginning of 
the twentieth centuries. 

Marx fought all his life against this petty-bourgeois Socialism 
— now resurrected in Russia by the Socialist-Revolutionary and 
Menshevik parties. He logically pursued his doctrine of the class 
struggle to the doctrine of political power, the doctrine of the 
state. 

The overthrow of bourgeois rule can be accomplished only by 
the proletariat, as the particular class whose economic conditions 
of existence train it -for this task and provide it with the opportun- 
ity and the power to perform it. While the bourgeoisie breaks up 
and disintegrates the peasantry and all the petty-bourgeois strata, 
it welds together, unites and organizes the proletariat. X)nly the 
proletariat — hy virtue of the economic role it plays in large-scale 
production — is capable of acting as the leader 'of all the toiling 
and exploited masses, whom the bourgeoisie exploits, oppresses 
and crushes not less, and oftea more, than it does the proletarians, 
but who are incapable of waging an independent struggle for their 
emancipation. 

The doctrine of the class struggle, as applied by Marx to the 
question of the state and of the Socialist revolution, leads inevi- 
tably to the recognition of the political rule of the proletariat, of 
its dictatorship, i.e., of power shared with none and relying directly 
upon the armed force of the masses. The overthrow of the bour- 
geoisie can be achieved only by the proletariat becoming trans- 
formed into the ruling class, capable of crushing the inevitable and 
desperate resistance of the bourgeoisie, and of organizing all> the 
toiling and exploited masses for the new economic order. 



34 


V. I, LENIM 


The proletariat needs state power, the centralized organization 
of force, the organization of violence, for the purpose of crushing 
the resistance of the exploiters and for the purpose of leading the 
great mass of the population — the peasantry, the petty bourgeoisie, 
the semi-proletarians — in the work of organizing Socialist economy. 

By educating the workers’ party, Marxism educates the van- 
guard of the proletariat which is capable of assuming power and 
of leading the whole people to Socialism, of directing and organ- 
izing the new order, of being the teacher, guide and leader of all 
the toilers and exploited in the task of building up their social 
life without the bourgeoisie and against the bourgeoisie. As against 
this, the opportunism which now predominates breeds in the ranks 
of the workers’ party representatives of the better paid workers, 
who lose touch with the rank and file, “get along” fairly well 
under capitalism, and sell their birthright for a mess of pottage, 
i.e., renounce their role of revolutionary leaders of the people 
against the bourgeoisie. 

Matx’s theory: “The state, i.e., the proletariat organized as the 
ruling class,” is ’’inseparably bound up with all he taught on the 
revolutionary role of the proletariat in history. The culmination 
of this role is the proletarian dictatorship, the political rule of the 
proletariat. 

But if the proletariat needs a state as a special form of organ- 
ization of violence against the bourgeoisie, the following deduction 
automatically arises: is it conceivable that such an organization 
can be created without first abolishing, destroying the state machine 
created by the bourgeoisie for itself. The Communist Manifesto 
leads straight to this deduction, and it is of this deduction, that 
Marx speaks when summing up the experience of the Revolution 
of 1848-51. 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


35 


2. THE REVOLUTION SUMMED UP 

Marx sums up the Revolution of 1848-51, in connection with 
the question of the state we are concerned with, in the following 
passage in The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte: 

. . But the revolution is thoroughgoing. It is still in pro- 
cess of passing through purgatory. It does its work method- 
ically. By December 2, 1851 [the day of Louis Bonaparte’s 
coup d’etat], it had completed one-half of its preparatory work; 
it is now completing the other half. Firtet it perfected the par- 
liamentary power, in order to be able to overthrow it. Now 
that it has attained this, it perfects the executive power, reduces 
it to its purest expression, isolates it, sets it up againfel 
itself as the sole target, in order to concentrate all its forces 
of destruction against it [italics ours]. And when it has done 
this second half of its preliminary work, Europe will leap 
from her seat and exultantly exclaim: well grubbed, old 
mole! “ 

“This executive power with its monstrous bureaucratic 
and military organization, with its artificial state machinery 
embracing wide strata, with a host of officials numbering half 
a million, besides an army of another half million, this appall- 
ing parasitic growth, which enmeshes the body of French 
society like a net and chokes all its pores, sprang up in the days 
of the absolute monarchy, with the decay of the feudal system, 
which it helped to hasten.” The first French Revolution devel- 
oped centralization, “but at the same time [it developed] the 
extent, the attributes and the agents of governmental authority. 
Napoleon perfected this state machinery.” The legitimatist 
monarchy and the July monarchy “added nothing but a greater 
division of labour. . . .” 



36 


V. I. LENIN 


“The parliamentary republic finally, in its struggle against 
the revolution, found itself compelled to strengthen, along with 
the repressive measures, the resources and centralization of gov- 
ernmental power. All the revolutions perfected 
this machine, instead of smashing it up [italics 
ours]. The parties that contended in turn for domination re- 
garded the possession of this huge state edifice as the principal 
spoils of the victor” {The Eighteenth Bruniaire of Louis Bona- 
parte, pp. 98-99, fourth edition, Hamburg, 1907). 

In this remarkable passage Marxism takes a tremendous step 
forward compared with The Communist Manifesto. In the latter, 
the question of the state is still treated in an extremely abstract 
manner, in the most general terms and expressions. In the above- 
quoted passage, the question is treated in a concrete manner, and 
the conclusion is most precise, definite, practical and palpable: 
all the revolutions which have occurred up to now have helped 
to perfect thao state machine, whereas it must be smashed, 
broken. 

This conclusion is the chief and fundamental thesis in the 
Marxian doctrine of the state. And it is precisely this fundamental 
thesis which has been not only completely forgotten by the pre- 
dominant official Social-Democratic Parties, but positively dis- 
torted (as we shall see later) by the foremost theoretician of the 
Second International, K. Kautsky. 

The Communist Manifesto gives a general feuramary of history, 
which compels us to regard the state as the organ of class rule and 
leads us to the inevitable conclusion that the proletariat cannot 
overthrow the bourgeoisie without first capturing political power, 
without attaining political supremacy, without transforming the 
j state into the “proletariat organized as the ruling class”; it inevita- 
bly leads to the conclusion that this proletarian state will begin 



THE STATE AND nEVOLUTION 


37 


jto wither away immediately after its victory, because the state is 
/ unnecessary and cannot exist in a society in which there are no 
class antagonisms. The question as to how, from the point of view 
of historical development, the substitution of the proletarian state 
for the bourgeois state is to take place is not raised. 

Marx raises this question and answers it in 1852. True to hife 
philosophy of dialectical materialism, Marx takes as his basis the 
experience of the great years of revolution, 1848 to 1851. Here, 
as everywhere, his teaching is the summary of experience, illuminat- 
ed by a profound philosophical conception of the world and a rich 
knowledge of history. 

The problem of the fetate is put concretely: how did the bour- 
geois state, the state machine necessary for the rule of the bour- 
geoisie, come into being historically? What changes did it under- 
go, what evolution did it undergo in the course of the bourgeois 
revolutions and in the face of the independent actions of the op- 
pressed classes? \ll'hat are the tasks of the proletariat in relation 
to this state machine? 

The centralized state power that is peculiar t» bourgeois society 
came into being in the period of the fall of absolutism. Two insti- 
tutions are most characteristic of this state machine: bureaucracy 
and a standing army. In their works, Marx and Engels repeatedly 
mention the thousand threads which connect these institutions with 
the bourgeoisie. The experience of every worker illustrates this 
connection in an extremely striking and impressive manner. From 
its own bitter experience, the working class learns to recognize 
this connection; that is why it learns so quickly and why it So 
completely assimilates the doctrine which reveals this inevitable 
connection, a doctrine which the petty-bourgeois democrats either 
ignorantly and light-heartedly deny, or, still more light-heartedly, 
admit “in general,” forgetting to draw the corresponding pracdcal 
conclusions. 



38 


V. 1. LEMN 


The bureaucracy and the standing army are a “parasite” on the 
body of bourgeois society — a parasite created by the inherent antag- 
onisms which rend that society, but a parasite which “chokes all 
its pores” of life. The Kautskyan opportunism now prevalent in 
ofhcial Social-Democracy considers the view that the state is a 
parasitic growth to be the peculiar and exclusive attribute of an- 
archism. Naturally, this distortion of Marxism is extremely use- 
ful to those philistines who have so utterly disgraced Socialism 
by justifying and embellishing the imperialist war with the term 
“defence of the fatherland”; but it is an absolute distortion 
nevertheless. 

The development, perfection and strengthening of the bureau- 
cratic and military apparatus proceeded during all the numerous 
bourgeois revolutions which Europe has witnessed since the fall of 
feudalism. It is precisely the petty bourgeoisie that is attracted to 
the side of the big bourgeoisie and is subordinated to it to a large 
extent by means of this apparatus, which provided the upper strata 
of the peasantry, small artisans, tradesmen and the like with com- 
paratively comfortable, quiet and respectable jobs which raise their 
holders above the people. Consider what happened in Russia during 
the six months following February 27, 1917. The governmental 
poste which hitherto had been given by preference to members of 
the Black-Hundreds now became the spoils of the Cadets, Menshe- 
viks and Socialist-Revolutionaries. Nobody really thought of in- 
troducing any serious reforms; every effort was made to put them 
off “until the Constituent Assembly was convened”; and to steadily 
put off the convocation of the Constituent Assembly until the end 
of the war! But there was no delay, no waiting for the Constituent 
Assembly in the matter of dividing the spoils, of getting the posts 
of ministers, vice-ministers, governors-general, etc., etc.! The game 
of combinations that was played in forming the government was, 
in essence, only an expression of this division and re-division of 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


39 


the “spoils,” which was going on high and low, tliroughout the 
country, in every department of central and local government. The 
six months between February 27 and August 27, 1917, can be 
summed up, objectively summed up beyond all dispute, as follows: 
reforms shelved, distribution of official posts accomplished and 
“mistakes” in the distribution corrected by a few re-distributions. 

But the more the bureaucratic apparatus is “re-distributed” 
among the various bourgeois and petty-bourgeois parties (among 
the Cadets, Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, if we take 
the case of Russia), the more clearly the oppressed classes, with 
the proletariat at their head, become conscious of their irrecon- 
cilable hostility to the whole of bourgeois society. That is why it 
is necessary for all bourgeois parties, even for the most democratic 
and “revolutionary-democratic” parties, to increase their repressive 
measures against the revolutionary proletariat, to strengthen the 
apparatus of repression, i.e., the state machine that we are discuss- 
ing. This course of events compels the revolution “to concentrate 
all its forces of destruction” against the state power, and to regard 
the problem, not as one of perfecting the state machine, but one 
of smashing and destroying it. 

It was not logical reasoning, but the actual development of 
events, the living experience of 1848-51, that led to the problem 
being presented in this way. The extent to which Marx held strictly 
to the feolid ground of historical experience can be seen from the 
fact that, in 1852, he did not yet deal concretely with the question 
of what was to take the place of the state machine that was to be 
destroyed. Experience had not yet provided material for the solu- 
tion of this problem which history placed on the order of the day 
later on, in 1871. In 1852 it was only possible to establish witli 
the accuracy of scientific observation that the proletarian revolu- 
tion had approached the task of “concentrating all its forces of 
destruction” against the state, of ^“breaking” the state machine. 



40 


V. 1. LENIN 


Here the question may arise: is it correct to generalize the 
experience, observations and conclusions of Marx, to apply them 
to a field that is wider than the history of France during the three 
years 1848-51? Before proceeding to answer this question we shall 
recall a remark made by Engels, and then we shall proceed to 
examine the facts. In his introduction to the third edition of The 
Eighteenth Brumaire Engels wrrote: 

“France is the land, where, more than anywhere else, the 
historical class struggles were each time fought out to a deci- 
sion, and where, consequently, the changing political forms 
within which they occur and in which their results are summa- 
rized have likewise been stamped with the sharpest outlines. The 
centre of feudalism in the Middle Ages, the model country of 
centralized monarchy resting on estates since the Renaissance, 
France has demolished feudalism in the Great Revolution and 
established the unalloyed rule of the bourgeoisie in a classical 
purity unequalled by any other European land. And the strug- 
gle of the uptvard striving proletariat against the ruling bour- 
geoisie alfeo appeared here in an acute form unknown else- 
where” (p. 4 of the 1907 edition). 

The last sentence is out of date, inasmuch as a lull has occurred 
in the revolutionary struggle of the French proletariat since 1871; 
although, long as this lull may be, it does not preclude the 
possibility that, in the coming proletarian revolution, France may 
once again reveal itself as the classic land of the elates struggle 
to a finish. 

Let us, however, cast a general glance over the history of the 
advanced countries at the end of the nineteenth and beginning of 
the twentieth centuries. We shall see that the same process has been 
going on more slowly, in more varied forms, on a much wider 



THE STATE AND BEVOLDTIOK 


41 


field: on the one hand, the development of “parliamentary power” 
in the republican countries (France, America, Switzerland), as well 
as in the monarchies (England, Germany to a certain extent, Italy, 
the Scandinavian countries, etc.) ; on the other hand, a struggle 
for power between the various bourgeois and petty-bourgeois parties 
which distribute and re-distribute the “spoils” of office, while 
the foundations of , bourgeois society remain unchanged. Finally, 
the perfection and consolidation of the “executive power,” its 
bureaucratic and military apparatus. 

There is not the slightest doubt that these features are common 
to tile whole of the modern evolution of all capitalist states 
in general. In the three years 1848-51 France displayed, in a swift, 
sharp concentrated form, all the processes of development which 
are peculiar to the whole capitalist world. 

Imperialism — the era of bank capital, the era of gigantic cap- 
italist monopolies, the era of the transformation of monopoly 
capitalism into state-monopoly capitalism — has particularly wit- 
nessed an unprecedented strengthening of the “state machine” and 
an unprecedented growth of its bureaucratic and military appara- 
tus, in connection with the increase in repressive measures against 
the proletariat in the monarchical as well as in the freest repub- 
lican countries. 

World history is now undoubtedly leading to the “concentra- 
tion of all the forces” of the proletarian revolution on the “destruc- 
tion” of the state machine on an incomparably larger scale than 
in 1852. 

What the proletariat will put in its place is indicated by the 
extremely instructive material provided by the Paris Commune. 



42 


V. 1. LENIN 


3. THE PRESENTATION OF THE QUESTION BY MARX IN 1852* 

In 1907, Mehring, in the magazine Neue Zeit** (Vol. XXV, 2, 
p. 164), published extracts from a letter from Marx to Weyde- 
roeyer dated March 5, 1852. This letter, among other things, con- 
tains the following remarkable observation: 

“And now as to myself, no credit is due to me for dis- 
covering the existence of classes in modern society, nor yet 
the struggle between them. Long before me, bourgeois historians 
had described the historical development of this class struggle, 
and bourgeois economists the economic anatomy of the classes. 
What I did that was new was to prove: 1) that the existence 
of classes is only bound up with particular, historic phases in 
the development of production \historische Entwicklungspha- 
sen der Production'] ; 2) that the class struggle necessarily leads 
to the dictatorship of the proletariat; 3) that this dictatorship 
itself only constitutes the transition to the abolition of all class- 
es and to a classless society.”’^-*'* 

In these words Marx succeeded in expressing with striking 
clarity, first, the chief and radical difference between his doctrine 
and that of the foremost and most profound thinkers of the bour- 
geoisie; and, second, the essence of his doctrine of the state. 

It is often said and written that the core of Marx’s theory is 
the class struggle; but this is not true. And from this error very 
often springs the opportunist distortion of Marxism, its falsifica- 
tion to make it acceptable to the bourgeoisie. For the doctrine of 

* This section was added by Lenin in tlie second Russian edition of 
The Stale and Revolution, 1919. — Ed. 

** Neue Zeit (New Times ) — the theoretical organ of Geiman Social- 
Democracy, published from 1883 to 1923. — Ed. 

The Correspondence of Marx , and Engels. — Ed. 



the state and revolution 


43 


the class struggle was created not by Marx, but by the bourgeoisie 
before Marx, and generally speaking it is acceptable to the bour- 
geoisie. Those who recognize only the class struggle are not yet 
Marxists; they may he found to be still within the boundaries of 
bourgeois reasoning and bourgeois politics. To limit Marxism to 
the doctrine of the class Struggle means curtailing Marxism, dis- 
torting it, reducing it to something which is acceptable to the 
bourgeoisie. Only he is a Marxist who extends the acceptance of 
the class struggle to the acceptance of the dictatorship of the pro- 
letariat. This is where the profound difference lies between a Mar.x- 
ist and an ordinary petty (and even big) bourgeois. This is the 
touchstone on which the real understanding and acceptance of 
Marxism should be tested. And it is not surprising that when the 
history of Europe brought the working class face to face with this 
question in a practical way, not only all the opportunists and re- 
formists, but all the Kautskyites (people who vacillate between 
reformism and Marxism) proved to be miserable philistines and 
petty-bourgeois democrats who repudiated the dictatorship of the 
proletariat. Kautsky’s pamphlet, The Dictatorship of the Proletariat, 
published in August 1918, i.e., long after the first edition of the 
present pamphlet, is an excunple of petty-bourgeois distortion of 
Marxism and base renunciation of it in practice, ^vhile hypocrit- 
ically recognizing it in words (see my pamphlet. The Proletarian 
Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky, Petrograd and Moscow, 
1918). 

Present-day opportunism in the person of its principal repre- 
sentative, the ex-Marxi'St, K. Kautsky, fits in completely with Marx’s 
characterization of the bourgeois position quoted above, for this 
opportunism limits the field of recognition of the class struggle 
to the realm of bourgeois relationships. (Within this reabn, within 
its framework, not a single educated liberal will refuse to recog- 
nize the class struggle “in principle”!) Opportunism does not 



44 


V. 1. LENIN 


carry the recognition of class struggle to the main point, to the 
period of transition from capitalism to Communism, to the period 
of the overthrow and complete abolition of the bourgeoisie. In 
reality, this period inevitably becomes a period of an unprecedent- 
edly violent class struggle in unprecedentedly acute forms and, 
consequently, during this period the state must inevitably be a 
state that is democratic in a new way (for the proletariat and the 
propertyless in general) and dictatorial in a new way (against the 
bourgeoisie). 

To proceed. The essence of Marx’s doctrine of the state is 
assimilated only by those who understand that the dictatorship of 
a single class is necessary not only for class society in general, not 
only for the proletariat which has overthrown the bourgeoisie, but 
for the entire historical period which separates capitalism from 
“classless society,” from Communism. The forms of bourgeois 
states are e.xtremely varied, but in essence they are all the same: 
in one way or another, in the final analysis, all these states are 
inevitably the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie. The transition from 
capitalism to Cofiimunism will certainly create a great variety and 
abundance of political forms, but their essence will inevitably be 
the same: the dictatorship of the proletariat. 



Chapter III 


THE STATE AND REVOLUTION. 
EXPERIENCE OF THE PARIS COMMUNE 
OF 1871. MARX’S ANALYSIS 


1. WHEREIN LAY THE HEROISM OF THE COMMUNARDS’ 
ATTEMPT? 

It is well known that in the autumn of 1870, a few months 
before the Commune, Marx warned the Paris workers that any 
attempt to overthrow the government would be the folly of despair. 
But when, in March 1871, a decisive battle wg^ jorced upon the 
workers and they accepted it, when the uprising had become a fact, 
Marx greeted the proletarian revolution with the greatest enthu- 
siasm, in spite of unfavourable auguries, Marx did not assume the 
rigid attitude of pedantically condemning an “untimely” move- 
ment as did the ill-famed Russian renegade from Marxism, Plekha- 
nov, who, in November 1905, wrote encouragingly about the work- 
ers’ and peasants’ struggle, but after December 1905, cried, liberal 
fashion: “They should not have taken to arms.” 

Marx, however, was not only enthusiastic about the heroism 
of the Communards who “stormed Heaven,” as he expressed it. 
Although it did not achieve its aim, he regarded the mass revolu- 
tionary movement as a historic experiment of momentous impor- 
tance, as an advance of the world proletarian revolution, as a 
practical step that was more important than hundreds of programs 

4fi 



46 


V. I. LENIN 


and discussions. Marx conceived his task to be to analyse this exper- 
iment, to draw lessons in tactics from it, to re-examine his theory 
in the new light it afforded. 

The only “correction” Marx thought it necessary to make in 
The Communist Manifesto, he made on the basis of the revolution- 
ary experience of the Paris Communards. 

The last preface to the new German edition of The Communist 
Manifesto, signed by both its authors, is dated June 24, 1872. In 
this preface the authors, Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, say that 
the program of The Communist 'Manifesto “has in some details 
become antiquated” now, and they go on to say: 

“One thing especially was proved by the Commune, viz., 
that ‘the working class cannot simply lay hold of the ready- 
made state machinery and wield it for its own purposes.’ ” 

The authors took the words in single quotation marks in this 
passage from Marx’s book, The Civil War in France. 

Thus, Marx and Engels regarded one of the principal and 
fundamental lessons of the Paris Commune as being of such mo- 
mentous importance that they introduced it as a vital correction 
into The Communist Manifesto. 

It is extremely characteristic that it ils precisely this vital cor- 
rection that has been distorted by the opportunists, and its mean- 
ing, probably, is not known to nine-tenths, if not ninety-nine hun- 
dredths, of the readers of The Communist Manifesto. We shall deal 
with this distortion more fully further on, in a chapter devoted 
specially to distortions. Here it will be sufficient to note that the 
current vulgar “interpretation” of Marx’s famous utterance just 
quoted is that Marx here emphasizes the idea of gradual 
development in contradistinction to the seizure of power, and so on. 

As a matter of fact, exactly the opposite is the 
case. Marx’s idea is that the ^forking elates must break up. 



THt STATE AND REVOLtlTtON 


47 


smash the “ready-made state machinery,” and not confine itself 
merely to laying hold of it. 

On April 12, 1871, i.e., just at the time of the Commune, Marx 
wrote to Kugelmann: 

“If you look at the last chapter of my Eighteenth Brumaire, 
you will find that I say that the next attempt of the French 
revolution will be no longer, as before, to transfer the bureau- 
cratic military machine from one hand to another, but to 
smash it [Marx’s italics — the original is zerbrechen], and that 
is a preliminary condition for every real people’s revolution 
on the continent. And this is what our heroic Party comrades 
in Paris are attempting.” {Neue Zeit, Vol. XX, 1, 1901-02, 
p. 709. The letters of Marx to Kugelmann have come out in 
Russian in no less than two editions, one of them edited and 
with an introduction by me.*) 

The words, “to femash the bureaucratic-military state machine,” 
briefly express the principal lesson of Marxism on the tasks of 
the proletariat in relation to the state during a devolution. And, 
it is precisely this lesson that has been not only completely for-i 
gotten, but positively distorted, in the prevailing Kautskyan “in- 
terpretation” of Marxism. 

As for Marx’s reference to The Eighteenth Brumaire, we quot- 
ed the corresponding passage in full above. 

It is interesting to note two particular points in the above 
quoted passage in Marx’s argument. First, he confines his conclu- 
sions to the Continent. This was natural in 1871, when England 
wafe still the model of a purely capitalist country, but without 
militarism and, to a considerable degree, without a bureaucracy. 
Hence, Marx excluded England, where a revolution, even a people’s 


See Lenin, Selected Works, Vol. XI, Eng. ed., p. 112. -^-Ed. 



48 


V. I. LENIN 


revolution, could be conceived of, and was then possible, without 
the condition of first destro 3 'ing the “ready-made state machinery.” 

Today, in 1917, in the epoch of the first great imperialist war, 
this qualification made by Marx is no longer valid. Both England 
and America, the greatest and last representatives — in the whole 
world — of Anglo-Saxon “liberty,” in the sentee that militarism and 
bureaucracy were absent, have today plunged headlong into the 
all-European filthy, bloody morass of bureaucratic-military insti- 
tutions to which everything is subordinated and which trample 
everything underfoot. Today, in England and in America, too, the 
“preliminary condition for every real people’s revolution” is the 
smashing, the destruction of the “ready-made state 
machinery” (brought in those countries, between 1914 and 1917, 
to general “European,” imperialist perfection). 

Secondly, particular attention should be paid to Marx’s ex- 
tremely profound remark that the destruction of the bureaucratic- 
military state machine is “a preliminary condition for every real 
people’s revolution.” This idea of a “people’s” revolution seems 
strange coming from Marx and the Russian Plekhanovites and 
Mensheviks, those follow'ers of Struve who wish to be regarded aS 
Marxists, might possibly declare such an expression to be a “slip of 
the pen.” They have reduced Marxism to such a state of wretched 
“liberal” distortion that nothing exists for them beyond the 
antithesis between bourgeois revolution and proletarian revolution 
— and even this antithesis they interpret in an utterly lifeless way. 

If, for example, we take the revolutions of the twentieth cen- 
tury, we shall, of course, have to admit that the Portuguese and 
the Turkish revolutions are both bourgeois revolutions.* Neither, 
however, is a “people’s” revolution inasmuch as in neither of them 
does the mass of the people, the enormous majority, come out 

* This refers to the bourgeois revolutions in Portugal (February 1908) 
and in Turkey (August 1908). — Eff, 



THE STATE AND REAOLUTION 


49 


actively, independently, tvith its own economic and political de- 
mands to any noticeable degree. On the other hand, although the 
Russian bourgeois revolution of 1905-07 presented no such “bril- 
liant” successes as at times fell to the lot of the Portuguese and 
Turkish revolutions, it was undoubtedly a “real people’s” revolu- 
tion, since the mass of the people, the majority, the “lowest social 
ranks,” crushed by oppression and exploitation, lose independently 
and put on the entire course of the revolution the impress of their 
demands, of their attempts to build in their oavu way a new society 
in place of the old society that was being destroyed. 

In Europe, in 1871, there was not a single country on the Con- 
tinent in which the proletariat constituted the majority of the 
people. A “people’s” revolution, one that actually swept the major- 
ity into its stream, could be such only if it embraced both the 
proletariat and the peasantry. These two classes then constituted 
the “people.” These two classes were united by the fact that the 
“bureaucratic-military state machine” oppressed, crushed, exploit- 
ed them. To smash this machine, to break it up— this is tvhat is 
truly in the interests of the “people,” of the majolity, of the work- 
ers and most of the peasants, this is what is “the preliminary con- 
dition” for a free alliance between the poor peasants and the pro- 
letarians; without such an alliance democracy is unstable and 
Socialist transformation is impossible. 

As is Avell known, the Paris Commune strove for sucli an al- 
liance, although it failed to achieve it owing to a number of cir- 
cumstances, internal and external. 

Consequently, in speaking of a “real people’s revolution,” 
Marx, without in the leatet forgetting the peculiar characteristics 
of the petty bourgeoisie (he spoke a great deal about them and 
often), took strict account of the class relations that actually exist- 
ed in the majority of continental countries in Europe in 1871. Pn 
the other hand, he asserted that the “smashing” of the state ma» 



V. X. LENIN 


chine was necessary in the interests of the workers and of the 
peasants, that it unites them, that it places before them the common 
task of removing the “parasite” and of superseding it by some- 
thing new. 

By what exactly? 


2. WHAT IS TO SUPERSEDE THE SMASHED STATE MACHINE? 

In 1847, in The Communist Manifesto, Marx’s answer to this 
question was still a purely abstract one, or, to speak more cor- 
rectly, it was an answer that indicated the problem, but did not 
solve it. The answer given in The Communist Manifesto vvas that 
“the proletariat organized as the ruling class,” the “winning of 
the battle of democracy” was to supersede this machine. 

Marx did not drop into utopia; he expected the experience of 
the mass movement to provide the reply to the question of the 
exact forms the organization of the proletariat as the ruling claiss 
will assume and the exact manner in which this organization will 
be combined wiih the most complete, most consistent “winning of 
the battle of democracy.” 

Marx subjected the experience of the Commune, meagre as it 
was, to the most careful analysis in The Civil War in France. Let 
us quote the most important passaged of this work. 

“Originating from the days of the Middle Ages, there de- 
veloped in the nineteenth century “the centralized state power, 
with its ubiquitous organs of standing army, police, bureauc- 
racy, clergy and judicature.” With the development of class 
antagonisms between capital and labour, “. . . the state power 
assumed more and more the character of the national power 
of capital over labour, of a public force organized for social 
enslavement, of an engine of class despotism. After every rev- 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


61 


olution marking a progressive phase in the class struggle, the 
purely repressive character of the state power stands out in 
bolder and bolder relief.” After the Revolution of 1848-49, 
the state power became “the national war engine of capital 
against labour.” The Second Empire'^' consolidated this. 

“The direct antithesis to the Empire was the Commune. 
It was the “positive form” of “a republic that was not only to 
supersede the monarchial form of class rule, but class rule 
itself.” 

What was this “positive” form of the proletarian, the Social- 
ist republic? What was the state it was beginning to create? 

“The first decree of the Commune . . . was the suppression 
of the standing army, and the substitution for it of the armed 
people.” 

This demand now figures in the program of every party calling 
itself Socialist. But the value of their programs is best shown by 
the behaviour of our Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, 
who, precisely after the revolution of Februarf 27, refused to 
carry out this demand! 

“The Commune was formed of the municipal councillors, 
chosen by universal suffrage in the various wards of the, town, 
responsible and revocable at short terms. The majority ‘of its 
members were naturally working men, or acknowledged repre- 
sentatives of the working class. . .'. Instead of continuing to be 
the agent of the Central Government, the police waS at once 
stripped of its political attributes, and turned into the respon- 
sible and at all times revocable agent of the Commune. So 
were the officials of all other branches of the administration. 

Second Empire — he., the empire under Napoleon III — Louis Bonap-nte 
(1852-70) as distinct from that of Napoleon I (1804-14). — Ed. 


4* 



62 


V. l. Lt.MN 


From the members of the Commune downwards, the public 
service had to be done at workmens wages. The vested interests 
and the representation allowances of the high dignitariefe of 
state disappeared along with the high dignitaries themselves. . . . 

•' “Having once got rid of the standing army and the police, 
the physical force elements of ike old government, the Com- 
mune was anxious to break the spiritual force of repression, 
the ‘parson-power’. . . . 

“The judicial functionaries were to be divested of [their] 
sham independence. . .” “they were to be elective, responsible 
and revocable.” 

Thus the Commune appears to have substituted “only” fuller 
democracy for the smashed state machine: abolition of the stand- 
ing army; all officials to be elected and subject to recall. But as 
a matter of fact this “only” signifies a gigantic supersession of 
certain institutions by other institutions of a fundamentally differ- 
ent order. This is a case of “quantity becoming transformed into 
quality”: democracy, introduced as fully and consistently as is in 
general conceivable, is transformed from bourgeois democracy into 
proletarian democracy; from the state ( = a special force for the 
suppression of a particular class) into something which is no long- 
er really a state. 

It is still necessary to suppress the bourgeoisie and crush its 
resistance. This was particularly necessary for the Commune; and 
one of the reasons for its defeat w'as that it did not do this with 
sufficient determination. But the organ of suppression is now the 
majority of the population, and not a minority, as was always the 
ease under slavery, teerfdom and wage-slavery. And since the major- 
ity of the people itselj suppresses its oppressors, a “special force” 
for suppression is n o I o nge r necessary] In this sense the 
state begins to wither away. Instead of the special institutions of 



THE STATE AND BEVOLliriON 


63 


a privileged minority (privileged ollicialdoiii, the coniniand of the 
standing army), the majority itself can directly fulfil all these 
functions, and the more the functions of state power devolve upon 
the people generally the less need is there for the existence of this 
power. 

In this connection the measures of the Commune emphasized by 
Marx are particularly noteworthy, viz., the abolition of all repre- 
sentation allowances, and of all monetary privileges in the case of 
officials, the reduction of the remuneration of all servants of the 
state to the level of “workmen s wages.” This shows more clearly 
than anything else the turn from bourgeois democracy to proletar- 
ian democracy, from the democracy of the oppressors to the de- 
mocracy of the oppressed classes, from the state as a “special 
force’’ for the suppression of a definite class to the suppression of 
the oppressors by the general force of the majority of the people 
— the workers and the jreasants. And it is precisely on this most 
striking point, perhaps the most important as far as the problem 
of the state is concerned, that the teachings of ,Marx have been 
most completely forgotten! In popular commentaries, the number 
of which is legion, this is not mentioned. It is “good form” to 
keep silent about it as if it were a piece of old-fashioned “naivete,” 
just as the Christians, after Christianity had attained the status 
of a state religion, “forgot” the “naiv'ete” of primitive Christi- 
anity with its democratic-revolutionary spirit. 

The reduction of the remuneration of the highest state officials 
seems to be “simply” a demand of naive, primitive democracy. One 
of the “founders” of modern opportunism, the ex-Social Democrat, 
Eduard Bernstein, has more than once exercised his talents in 
repeating the vulgar bourgeois jeers at “primitive” democracy. 
Like all opportunists, and like the present Kautskyans, he utterly 
failed to understand that, first of all, the jransition from capital- 
ism to Socialism is (mpossihfe without some “reversion” to, “prim- 



54 


V. I. LENIN 


itive” democracy (for how else can the majority, and even the 
whole population, proceed to discharge state functions?); and 
Secondly, he forgets that “primitive democracy’’ based on capital- 
ism and capitalist culture is not the same as primitive democracy 
in pre-historic or pre-capitalist times. Capitalist culture has created 
large-scale production, factories, railways, the postal service, tele- 
phones, etc., and on this basis the great majority of the function^ 
of the old “state power” have become so simplified and can be 
reduced to such simple operations of registration, filing and check- 
ing that they can be easily performed by every literate person, can 
quite easily be performed for ordinary “workmen’s wages,” and 
can (and must) be stripped of every shadow of privilege, of every 
semblance of “official grandeur.” 

All officials, without exception, elected and subject to recall 
at any time, their salaries reduced to the level of ordinary “work- 
men’s wages” — these simple and “self-evident” democratic meas- 
ures, while completely uniting the interests of the workers and 
the majority of* the peasants, at the same time serve as a 
bridge between capitalism and Socialism. These measures concern 
the purely political reconstruction of society; but, of course, 
they acquire their full meaning and significance only in connec- 
tion with the “expropriation of the expropriators” either being 
accomplished or in preparation, i.e., with the transformation 
of capitalist private ownership of the means of production into 
Social ownership. 

“The Commune,” Marx wrote, “made that catchword of 
bourgeois revolutions, cheap government, a reality by destroy- 
ing the two greatest sources of expenditure — the standing army 
and slate functionarism.” 

From the peasantry, as from other sections of the petty bour- 
geoisie, only an insignificant fey' “rise to the top,” “get on in the 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


55 


world ’ in the bourgeois sense, r.e., become either well-to-do people, 
bourgeois, or officials in secure and privileged positions. In every 
capitalist country where there is a peasantry (as there is in most 
capitalist countries), the vast majority of the peasants are oppressed 
by the government and long for its overthrow, long for 
“cheap” government. This can be achieved only by the proletariat; 
and by achieving it, the proletariat at the same time takes a step 
towards the Socialist reconstruction of the state. 

3. ABOLITION OF PARLIAMENTARISM 

“The Commune,” Marx wtrote, “was to be a working, not 
a parliamentary body, executive and legislative at the same 
time. . . .” 

“Instead of deciding once in three or six years which 
member of the ruling class was to represent and repress 
{vertreten und zertreten) the people in parliament, universal 
suffrage was to serve the people, constituted in Communes, as 
individual suffrage serves every other eraplo^yer in the search 
for the workmen and managers in his business.” 

Thanks to the prevalence of social-chauvinism and opportun- 
ism, this remarkable criticism of parliamentarism made in 1R71 
also belongs now to the “forgotten words” of Marxism. The Cab- 
inet Ministers and professional parliamentarians, the traitors to 
the proletariat and the “practical” Socialists of our day, have left 
all criticism of parliamentarism to the anarchists, and, on this 
wonderfully intelligent ground, they denounce all criticism of 
parliamentarism as “anarchism”!! It is not surprising that the 
proletariat of the “advanced” parliamentary countries, disgusted 
with such “Socialists” as Messrs. Scheidemanns, Davids, Legjens, 
Sembats, Renaudels, Hendersons, Vanderveldes, Staunings, Brant- 



Y. 1. LENIN 


b(J 

ingte, Bissolalis and Co., has been more and more giving its sym- 
pathies to anarcho-syndicalisrn, in spite of the fact that the latter 
is but the twin brother of opportunism. 

But for Marx revolutionary dialectics was never the empty 
fashionable phrase, the toy rattle, which Plekhanov, Kautsky and 
the others have made of it. Marx knew how to break with anarch- 
ism ruthlessly for its inability to make use even of the “pig-sty’’ 
of bourgeois parliamentarism, especially when the situation is ob- 
viously not revolutionary; but at tbe same time he knew how to 
subject parliamentarism to genuine revolutionary proletarian crit- 
icism. 

To decide once every few years which member of the ruling 
class is to repress and oppress the people in parliament— this is 
the real essence of bourgeois parliamentarifem, not only in parlia- 
mentary-constitutional monarchies, but also in the most democrat- 
ic republics. 

But if it is the state we are to examine, and if parliamentarism 
is to be regarded as one of the institutions of the state from the 
point of vnen of the tasks of the proletariat in this field, what is 
the way out of parliamentarism? How can it be dispensed with? 

Once again we must repeat: the lessons of Marx, based on the 
study of the Commune, have been so completely forgotten that any 
criticism of parliamentarism, other than anarchist or reactionary 
criticism, is quite unintelligible to the present-day “social-demo- 
crat” (read present-day traitor to Socialism). *. 

The way out of parliamentarism is not, of course, the aboli- 
tion of the representative institutions and the electoral principle, 
but the conversion of the representative institutions from mere 
“talking shops” into working bodies. “The Commune was to be 
a working, not a parliamentary body, executive and legislative at 
the .same time.” 

“A working, not a parliamentary body” — this hits straight 



THE STATE AND ItE\0LUT10N oT 

from the shoulder at the present-da)' parliamentarians and parlia- 
mentary “lap-dogs” of Social-Democracy! Take any parliament- 
ary country, from America to Switzerland, from France to Eng- 
land, Norway and so forth — in these countries the actual work of 
the “state” is done behind the scenes and is carried on by the de- 
partments, chancellories and General Staffs. Parliament itself is 
given up to talk for the special purpose of fooling the “common 
people.” This is so true that even in the Russian republic, a bour- 
geois-democratic republic, all these sins of parliamentarism were 
immediately revealed, even before a real parliament was created. 
The heroes of rotten philistinism, such ate the Skobelevs and Tsere- 
telis. the Chernovs and Avksentyevs, have managed to pollute even 
the Soviets with the most disgusting bourgeois parliamentarism and 
to convert them into mere talking shops. In the Soviets, the Right 
Honourable “Socialist” Ministeite are fooling the credulous rustics 
with phrasemongering and resolutions. In the government itself a 
sort of permanent quadrille is going on in order that, on the one 
hand, as many Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks as pos- 
sible may in turn get near the “pie,” the lucrative and honourable 
posts, on the other hand, the “attention of the people” may be 
engaged. Meanwhile, the real “state” business is being done in the 
chancellories and General Staffs. 

Dyelo Naroda, the organ of the ruling “Socialist-Revolution- 
ary” Party, recently admitted in an editorial article — with the 
matchless candour of people of “good society,” in which “all” are 
engaged in political prostitution — that even in those ministries of 
which the “Socialists” (save the mark) are at the head, the whole 
bureaucratic apparatus has in fact remained as of old, is working 
in the old way and “freely” sabotaging revolutionary measures.^ 
Even without this admission, would not the actual history of Hh^ 
participation of the-Socialist-Revjjlulionaries and Mensheviks in, 



68 


V. 1. LKJVIN 


the government pro\e this? The only characteristic thing in this 
is that, in the Ministerial company of the Cadets, Messrs. Cher- 
novs, Russanovs, Zenzinov^ and the other editors of Dyelo Naroda 
have so completely lost all sense of shame as to unblushingly pro- 
claim, as if it were a mere bagatelle, that in “their” Ministries 
everything has remained as of old!! Revolutionary-democratic 
phrases to gull the rural Simple Simons; bureaucracy and red 
tape for the “benefit” of the capitalists — that is the essence of the 
“honest” coalition. ■ 

The Commune was to have substituted for the venal and rotten 
parliamentarism of bourgeois society institutions in which freedom 
of opinion and discussion would not have degenerated into decep- 
tion, for the parliamentarians would have had to work themselves, 
vsould have had to execute their own laws, themselves to test their 
results in real life, and would have been directly responsible to 
their constituents. Representative institutions would have remained, 
but there was to have been no parliamentarism as a special system, 
as the division of labour between the legislative and the executive, 
as a privileged position for the deputies. We cannot imagine de- 
mocracy, not even proletarian democracy, without representative 
institution^, but we can and must imagine democracy without par- 
liamentarism, if criticism of bourgeois society is not mere empty 
words for us, if the desire to overthrow the rule of the bourgeoi- 
sie is our earnest and sincere desire, and not a mere “election” 
cry for catching workers’ votes, as it is with the Menshevikte and 
Socialist-Revolutionaries, the Scheidemanns, Legiens, Sembats and 
Vanderveldes. 

It is extremely instructive to note that, in speaking of the 
functions of the officials who are necessary for the Commune and 
for the proletarian democracy, Marx compares them to the workers 
of “every other employer,” that is, of the ordinary capitalist en- 
terprise, with its “workmen, foremen and clerks.” 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


69 


There is no trace of utopianism in Marx, in the sense that he 
invented or imagined a “new” society. No, he studied the birth of 
the new society from the old, the forms of transition from the lat- 
ter to the former as a natural-historical process. He examined the 
actual experience of a mafes proletarian movement and tried to 
draw practical lessons from it. He “learned” from the Commune, 
just as all the great revolutionary thinkers were not afraid to learn 
from the experience of the great movements of the oppressed class- 
es, and never preached them pedantic “sermons” (such as Plekha- 
nov’s: “they should not have taken to arms”; or Tsereteli’s: “A 
class must limit itself”^. 

There can he no thought of destroying bureaucracy immediate- 
ly, everywhere and completely. That is utopia. But to smash the 
old bureaucratic machine at once and to begin immediately to 
construct a new one that will enable all bureaucracy to be gradual- 
ly abolished is not utopia, it is borne out by the experience of the 
Commune, it is the direct and immediate task of the revolutionary 
proletariat. i 

Capitalism simplifies the functions of “state” administration; 
it makes it possible to throw “official grandeur” aside and to re- 
duce the whole business to a matter of organizing the proletarians 
(as the ruling class), which will hire “workmen, foremen and 
clerks” in the name of the whole of society. 

We are not Utopians, we do not indulge in “dreams” of dis- 
pensing at once with all administration, with all subordination; 
these anarchist dreams, based upon a lack of understanding of the 
tasks of the proletarian dictatorship, are totally alien to Marxism, 
and, as a matter of fact, serve only to postpone the Socialist revo- 
lution until human nature has changed. No, we want the Socialist 
revolution with human nature as it is now, with human nature 
that cannot dispense with subordination, control and, “foremen 
and clerks.” 



60 


V. I. LENIN 


Bul ihe subordination must be to the armed vanguard of all 
the exploited, of all the toilers, i.e., to the proletariat. Measures 
can and must be taken at once, overnight, to substitute for the 
specific “official grandeur” of state officials the simple functions 
of “workmen and managers,” functions which are already fully 
within the capacity of the average city dweller and can ^vell be 
performed for “workmen’s wages."’ 

W'e ourselves, the workers, will organize large-scale produc- 
tion on the basis of what capitalism has already created, relying 
on our own experience as workers, establishing strict, iron dis- 
cipline supported by the state power of the armed workers; we 
shall reduce the role of the state officials to that of simply carry- 
ing out our instructions aS responsible, revocable, modestly paid 
“managers” (of course, with the aid of technicians of all sorts, 
types and degrees). This is our proletarian task, this is what ve 
can and must start with in carrying out the proletarian revolutioji. 
Such a beginning, on the basis of large-scale production, will of 
itfeclf lead to ihf gradual “withering away” of all bureaucracy, 
to the gradual creation of an order, an order without quotation 
marks, which will be different from wage-slavery, an order in 
which the functions of control and accounting — becoming more 
and more simple — will be performed by each in turn, will then be- 
come a habit and will finally die out as the special functions of 
a special section of the population. 

A witty German Social-Democrat of the seventies of the last 
century called the post-office an example of the Socialist system. 
This is very true. At present the post-office is a business organized 
on the lines of a state-capitalist monopoly. Imperialism is gradual- 
ly transforming all trusts info organizations of a similar type, in 
which, over the “common” toilers, who are overworked and starved, 
there stands the same bourgeois bureaucracy. But the mecha- 
nism of social management is here already to hand. Overthrow the 



THE STATE AND REAOI.LTION 


Cl 


capitalists, crush the resistance of these exploiters with the iron 
hand of the armed W'orkers, smash the bureaucratic machine of 
the modern state — and you will have a mechanism of the highest 
technical equipment, free from the “parasite,” capable of being 
wielded by the united workers themselves, who will hire their own 
technicians, managers and bookkeeperls, and pay them all, as, in- 
deed all “state” officials in general, ordinary workmen’s wages. 
Here is a concrete, practical task, immediately possible of ful- 
filment in relation to all trusts, a task that will free the toilers 
from exploitation and take into account what the Commune had 
already begun to practice (particularly in the field of state con- 
struction) . 

Our immediate object is to organize the tvhole national econ- 
omy on the lines of the postal system, so that the technicians, 
managers, bookkeepers, as well as all officials, shall receive sala- 
ries no higher than “workmen’s wages,” all under the control and 
leadership of the armed proletariat, ft is such a state, standing on 
such an economic bash, that we need. This is what will bring about 
the abolition of parliamentarism and the preservaiion of represent- 
ative institutions. This is what will rid the labouring classes of 
the prostitution of these institutions by the bourgeoisie. 

i. ORGANIZATION OF NATIONAL UNITY 

“. . . In a rough sketch of national organization which the 
Commune had no time to develop, it stateis clearly that the 
Commune tvas to be the political form of even the smallest 
country hamlet. . . .” The Communes were to elect the “Nation- 
al Delegation” in Paris. 

“. . . The few but important functions which still would 
remain for a central government were not to be suppressed, 
as has been intentionally misstated, but were to be discharged 



V. 1. LENIN 


by Communal and therefore strictly responsible agents. . . . 
The unity of the nation rvas not to be broken, but, on the 
contrary, to be organized by the Communal Constitution, and 
to become a reality by the destruction of the state power which 
claimed to be the embodiment of that unity independent of, 
and superior to, the nation itself, from which it was but a 
parasitic excrescence. While the merely repressive organs of 
the old governmental power were to be amputated, ite legiti- 
mate functions were to be wrested from an authority usurping 
pre-eminence over society itself, and restored to the respon- 
sible agents of society.” 

To what extent the opportunists of present-day Social-De- 
mocracy have failed to understand — or perhaps it would be more 
true to say, did not want to understand — these observationis of 
Marx is best shown by the book of Herostratean fame of the rene- 
gade Bernstein, The Premises of Socialism and the Tasks of Social- 
Democracy. It is precisely in connection with the above passage 
from Marx that Bernstein wrote that this program “. ..in its po- 
litical content, in all its essential features, displays the greatest 
similarity to the federalism of Proudhon. ... In spite of all the 
other points of difference between Marx and the ‘petty-bourgeois’ 
Proudhon [Bernstein places the word “petty-bourgeois” in quota- 
tion marks in order to make it sound ironical], on these pointe 
their ways of thinking resemble each other as closely as could be.” 
Of course, Bernstein continues, the importance of the municipali- 
ties is growing, but “it seems doubtful to me whether the first task 
of democracy would be such a dissolution [Auflosung] of the mod- 
ern states and such a complete transformation [Umwandlung] 
of their organization as is visualized by Marx and Proudhon — the 
formation of a National Assembly from delegates of the provincial 
or district assemblies, which, in their turn, would consist of dele- 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


63 


gates from the Communes, — so that the whole previous mode of 
national representation would vanish completely.” (Bernstein, 
Premises, pp. 134 and 136 of the German edition of 1899). 

To confuse Marx’s views on the “destruction of the state pow- 
er — of the parasitic excrescence” with Proudhon’s federalism is 
positively monstrous! But it is not an accident, for it never occurs 
to the opportunist that Marx does not speak here about federal- 
ism as opposed to centralism, hut about smashing the old, bour- 
geois state machine which exists in all bourgeois countries. 

The only thing that penetrates the opportunist’s mind is what 
he sees around him, in a society of petty-bourgeois philistinism 
and “reformist” stagnation, namely, only “municipalities!” The 
opportunist has even forgotten how to think about proletarian 
revolution. 

It is ridiculous! But the remarkable thing is that nobody dis- 
puted Bernstein on this point. Bernstein has been refuted by many, 
especially by Plekhanov in Russian literature and by Kautsky in 
European literature, but neither of them said anything about this 
distortion of Marx by Bernstein. 4 

To such an extent has the opportunist forgotten to think in 
a revolutionary way and to ponder over revolution that he attri- 
butes “federalism” to Marx and confutees him with the founder of 
anarchism, Proudhon. And Kautsky and Plekhanov, those would- 
be orthodox Marxists and defenders of the doctrine of revolution- 
ary Marxism, are silent on this point! Herein lies one of the 
roots of the extreme vulgarization of the views concerning the 
difference between Marxism and anarchism which is characteristic 
of the Kautskyanfe and of the opportunists, and which we shall 
discuss later. 

Marx’s observations on the experience of the Commune just 
quoted contain not a trace of federalism. Marx agreed with Proudhon 
on the very point that the opportunist Bernstein failed to see. 



■64 


V. I. LENIN 


Marx disagreed with Proudhon on the ler) point on which Bernstein 
-said there was agreement. 

Marx agreed with Proudhon on the necessity of “smashing” the 
present state machine. Neither the opportunists nor the Kautskyans 
wish to see this similarity between Marxism and anarchism (both 
Proudhon and Bakunin) because on this point they have departed 
from Marxism. 

Marx differed both with Proudhon and with Bakunin precisely 
on the question of federalism (not to mention the dictatorship of 
the proletariat). Federalism as a principle follows logically from 
the petty-bourgeois views of anarchism. Marx was a centralist. 
There is no departure from centralism in his observations just 
quoted. Only those who are imbued with the petty-bourgeois “su- 
perstitious belief” in the state can mistake the abolition of the bour- 
geois state machine for the abolition of centralism! 

But will it not be centralism if the proletariat and poor peas- 
antry take political power into their own hands, organize them- 
selves freely in communes, and unite the action of all the com- 
munes in strikirfh at capital, in crushing the resistance of the cap- 
italists, and in transferring the ownership of the railways, factories, 
land and so forth to the entire nation, to the whole of society? Will 
that not be the most consistent democratic centralism? And prole- 
tarian centralism at that? 

Bernstein simply cannot conceive the possibility of voluntary 
centralism, of the voluntary amalgamation of the communes inte 
a nation, the voluntary fusion of the proletarian communes for 
the purpose of destroying bourgeois rule and the bourgeois state 
machine. Like all philistines, Bernstein can imagine centralism 
only as something from above, to be imposed and maintained solely 
by the bureaucracy and the military. 

, Marx, as though foreseeing the possibility of his ideas being 
distorted, deliberately emphasized the fact that the charge that the 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


65 


Commune desired to destroy the unity of the nation, to abolish the 
central power, was an intentional misstatement. Marx deliberately 
used the words : “The unity of the nation was ... to be organized,” 
so as to contrast conscious, democratic proletarian centralism to 
bourgeois, military, bureaucratic centralism. 

But . . . there are none so deaf as those who will not hear. And 
the very thing the opportunists of present-day Social-Democracy 
do not want to hear about is the destruction of the state power, 
the amputation of the parasitic excrescence. 

5. ABOLITION OF THE PARASITE STATE 

We have already quoted Marx’s utterance on this subject, and 
we must now supplement them. 

“It is generally the fate of completely new historical crea- 
tions,” he wrote, “to be mistaken for the counter-part of older 
and even defunct forms of social life, to which they may bear 
a certain likeness. Thus, this new Commune, which breaks the 
modern state power, has been mistaken for a reproduction of 
the mediaeval Communes . . . for ... a federation of small states, 
as dreamt of by Montesquieu and the Girondins . . . for an 
exaggerated form of the ancient struggle against over-centrali- 
zation. . . . The Communal Constitution would have restored to 
the social body all the forces hitherto absorbed by the state 
parasite feeding upon and clogging the free movement of socie- 
ty. By this one act it would have initiated the regeneration of 
France. . . . The Communal Constitution brought the rural pro- 
ducers under the intellectual lead of the central towns of their 
districts, and there secured to them, in the working men, the 
natural trustees of their interests. The very existence of the Com- 
mune involved, as a matter of course, local municipal libeity, 
but no longer as a check upon the now superseded state power.” 



66 


V. I. LENIN 


“Destruction of the state power,” which was a “parasitic ex- 
crescence”; the “amputation” and “smashing” of “the now 
superseded state power” — these are the expressions Marx used 
of the state in appraising and analysing the experience of the 
Commune. 

All this was written a little less than half a century ago; and 
now one has to make excavations, as it were, to bring undistorted 
Marxism to the knowledge of the masses. The conclusions drawn 
from the observation of the latet great revolution which Marx lived 
through were forgotten just at the moment when the time for the 
next great proletarian revolutions had arrived. 

“The multiplicity of interpretations to which the Commune 
has been subjected, and the multiplicity of interests which 
construed it in their favour, show that it was a thoroughly ex- 
pansive political form, while all previous forms of government 
had been emphatically repressive. Its true secret was thite. It 
was essentiayy a working-class government, the product of the 
struggle of the producing against the appropriating class, the 
political form at last discovered under which to work out the 
economical emancipation of labour. 

“Except on this last condition, the Communal Constitution 
would have been an impossibility and a delusion.” 

The Utopians busied themselves with “discovering” political 
forms under which the Socialist transformation of society was to 
take place. The anarchists waived the question of political forms 
altogether. The opportunists of present-day Social-Democracy ac- 
cepted the bourgeois political forms of the parliamentary demo- 
cratic tetate as the unsurpassable limit; they battered their foreheads 
piaying before this “idol” and denounced every attempt to smash 
tliese forms as anarchism. 



THE STATE AND DEVOLUTION 


67 


Marx deduced from the whole history of Socialism and of the 
political struggle that the slate was bound to disappear, and that 
the transitional form of its disappearance (the transition from 
state to no state) would be the “proletariat orgaruzed as tire 
ruling class.” But Marx did not set out to discover the political 
forms of this future stage. He limited himself to a precise ob- 
servation of French history, to analysing it, and to the conclu- 
sion to which the year 1851 had led, viz., that matters were mov- 
ing towards the smashing of the bourgeois state machine. 

And when the mass revolutionary movement of the proletariat 
burst forth, Marx in spite of the failure of that movement, in 
spite of its short life and its patent weakness, began to study the 
political forms it had discovered. 

The Commune is the form “at last discovered” by the proleta- 
rian revolution, under which to work out the economic emancipa- 
tion of labour. 

The Commune is the first attempt of a proletarian revolution to 
smash the bourgeois state machine and constitujes the political 
form “at last discovered” which can and must supersede the 
smashed machine. 

We shall see telow that the Russian Revolutions of 1905 and 
1917, in different circumstances and under different conditions, 
continue the work of the Commune and corroborate Marx’s brilliant 
historical analysis. 



Chapter IV 


CONTINUATION. SUPPLEMENTARY 
EXPLANATIONS BY ENGELS 

Marx cave the fundamentals on the question of the significance 
of the experience of the Commune. Engels returned to the same 
subject repeatedly and explained Marx’s analysis and conclusions, 
sometimes illuminating other sides of the question with such power 
and vividness that it is necessary to deal with his explanations 
separately. 


(, 1. “THE HOUSING QUESTION” 

In his work, The Housing Question (1872), Engels took into 
account the experience of the Commune, and dealt several times 
with the tasks of the revolution in relation to the state. It is interest- 
ing to note that the treatment of this concrete subject revealed, on 
the one hand, points of similarity between the proletarian state 
and the present state — features which give grounds for speaking of 
the state in both cases — ^and, on the other hand, features which dif- 
ferentiate them, or the transition to the abolition of the state. 

‘‘How is the housing question to be solved then? In preis- 
ent-day society, just as emy other social question is solved; by 
the gradual economic adjustment of supply and demand, a sol- 
‘ II lion which ever reproduces the question itself anew and there- 
fore is no Solution. How a^social revolution would solve this 


C8 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


G9 


question depends not only on the circumstances which would 
exist in each case, but is also connected with still more far- 
reaching questions, among which one of the most fundamental 
is the abolition of the antithesis between town and country. 
As it is not our task to create utopian systems for the arange- 
ment of the future society, it would be more than idle to go 
into the question here. But one thing is certain: there are 
already in existence sufficient buildings for dwellings in the big 
towns to remedy immediately any real ‘housing shorlage,' given 
rational utilization of them. This can naturally only take place 
by the expropriation of the present owners and by quartering 
in their houses the homelesfe or those workers excessively over- 
crowded in their former houses. Immediately the proletariat 
has conquered political power such a measure dictated in the 
public interests will be just as easy to carry out as other ex- 
propriations and billetings are by the existing state.” (P. 22 of 
the German edition of 1887.) 

The change in the form of the tetate po wci iS not discussed 
here, but only the content of its activity. Expropriations and oc- 
cupation of houses take place by order even of the present state. 
From the formal point of view the proletarian state will also 
"order” the occupation of houses and expropriation of buildings. 
But it is clear that the old executive apparatus, the bureaucracy, 
which is connected with the bourgeoisie, would simply be unfit to 
carry out the orders of the proletarian state. 

“. . . For the refet it must be pointed out that the ‘actual 
seizure’ of all instruments of labour, the seizure of industry as 
a whole by the working people, is the exact contrary of ^ the 
Proudhonist theory of ‘gradual redemption.’ Under the latter. 



70 


V. I. LEMN 


the individual worker becomes the owner of the dwelling, the 
peasant farm, the instruments of labour; under the former, the 
‘working people’ remain the collective owners of the houses, 
factories and instruments of labour, and would hardly permit 
their use, at least in a transitional period, by individuals or 
associations without compensation for the cost, just as the 
abolition of property in land is not the abolition of ground 
rent, but its transfer, although in a modified form, to society. 
The actual seizure of all the instruments of labour by the 
working people therefore does not at all exclude the retention 
of the rent relations.” (P. 69.) 

We shall discuss the question touched upon in this passage, 
namely, the economic reasons for the withering away of the state, 
in the next chapter. Engels expresses himself motet cautiously, 
saying that the proletarian state nould “hardly” permit, “at least 
in a transitional period,” the use of houses without compensation 
for the cost. The^ letting of houses that belong to the whole people, 
to separate families preteupposes the collection of rent, a certain 
amount of control, and a certain standard of allotment of houses. 
All this calls for a certain form of state, but it does not call for 
a special military and bureauciatic apparatus, with officials oc- 
cupying especially privileged positions. The transition to a state of 
affairs when it will be possible to supply dwellings rent-free is 
bound up with the complete “withering away” of the state. 

Speaking of the conversion of the Blanquists* to the principles 


Blanquists — the followers of the well-known French revolutionary 
August Blanqui (1805-1881). The Blanquists, as Lenin put it, expected 
“that mankind would be freed from wage-slavery not by means of the 
proletarian class struggle, but by means of a conspiracy hatched by a small 
minority of intellectuals,” The Blanquists played a prominent part in the 
Paris (iommune of 1871. In 1901 they joined the Socialist Party of France 
founded by Jules Guesde. — Ed. 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


71 


of Marxism after the Commune and as a result of its experience, 
Engels, in passing, formulates these principles as follows: 

. . Necefesity of political action of the proletariat and of 
the dictatorship of the proletariat as the transitional stage to 
the abolition of classes and with them of the state. . . .” (P. 55.) 

Addicts to hair-splitting criticism, and bourgeois “extermina- 
tors of Marxism,” will perhaps see a contradiction between this 
recognition of the “abolition of the state” and the repudiation of 
this formula as an anarchist one in the previously-quoted passage 
from Anti-DUhring. It would not be surprising if the opportunists 
stamped Engels, too, as an “anarchist,” for the habit of accusing 
the internationalists of anarchism is becoming more and more 
widespread among the social-chauvinists. 

Marxism hafe always taught that the state will be abolished with 
the abolition of classes. The well-known passage on the “withering 
away of ihe state'’ in Anti-Duhring does not biame the anarchists 
simply for being in favour of the abolition of fhe state, but for 
preaching that the state can be abolbhed “overnight.” 

In view of the fact that the now prevailing “Social-Democratic” 
doctrine completely distorts the relation of Marxism to anarchism 
on the question of the abolition of the state, it will be very useful 
to recall a certain controversy conducted by Marx and Engels with 
the anarchists. 

2. CONTROVERSY WITH THE ANARCHISTS 

This controversy took place in 1873. Marx and Engels contrib- 
uted articles against the Proudhonists, “autonomists” or “anti- 
authoritarians,” to an Italian Socialist annual, and it was not until 
1913 that these articles appeared in German in Neue Zeit. 



72 


V. I. liNIN 


“If the political Struggle of the working class assumes 
violent forms,” Marx wrote, ridiculing the anarchists and their 
repudiation of politics, “if the workers set up their revolution- 
ary dictatorship in place of the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, 
they commit the terrible crime of violating principles, for in 
order to satisfy their wretched, vulgar, everyday needs, in order 
to crush the resistance of the bourgeoisie, instead of laying 
down their armte and abolishing the state, they give the state 
a revolutionary and transitory form . . . (Neue Zeit, Vol. 

XXXII, 1, 1913-14, p. 40.) 

It was exclusively against this kind of “abolition” of the state 
that Marx fought in refuting the anarchists! He did not comhat 
the theory that the state would disappear when classes disappeared, 
or that it would be abolished when classes were abolifehed; he op- 
posed the proposition that the workers should renounce the use of 
arms, of organized force, that is, the state, which was to serve to 
“crush the resistance of the bourgeoisie.” 

To prevent ^le true meaning of hfe struggle against anarchism 
from being distorted, Marx deliberately emphasized the “revolution- 
ary and transitory form” of the state which the proletariat needs. 
The proletariat needs the state only temporarily. We do not at all 
disagree with the anarchists on the question of the abolition of the 
state as an aim. We maintain that, to achieve this aim, we must 
temporarily make use of the instruments, resources and methods of 
the state power against the exploiters, just as the dictatorship of 
the oppressed class is temporarily necessary for the abolition of 
classete. Marx chooses the sharpest and clearest way of stating his 
position against the anarchists: after overthrowing the yoke of the 
capitalists, should the workers “lay down their arms,” or use them 
against the capitalists in order to crush their resistance? But what 
te the syslematie use of arms by one class against the other, if not 
a “transitory form” of state? ^ 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


IS 

Let every Social-Democrat ask himself: is that the way he has 
been putting the question of the state in controversy with the an- 
archists? Is that the way the vast majority of the ofibcial Socialist 
parties of the Second International have heen putting it? 

Engels enlarges on the same ideas in even greater detail and 
more popularly. First of all he ridicules the muddled ideas of 
the Proudhonites, who called themselves “anti-authoritarians,” i.e., 
repudiated every sort of authority, every sort of subordination, 
every sort of power. Take a factory, a railway, a ship on the high 
seas, said Engelfe — ^is it not clear that not one of these complex 
technical units, based on the employment of machinery and the 
ordered co-operation of many people, could function without a 
certain amount of subordination and, consequently, without a cer- 
tain amount of authority or power? 

“When I put these arguments up against the most rabid 
anti-authoritarians,” writes Engels, “they were only able to 
give me the following answer: ‘Ah! that is true, but here it is 
not a case of authority which we confer on delegates, but of a 
commUsionV These gentlemen think that they have changed 
the thing by changing its name. . . 

Having thus shown that authority and autonomy are relative 
terms, that the sphere of their application varies with the various 
phases of social development, that it is absurd to take them as ab- 
solute, and adding that the sphere of the application of machinery and 
large-scale production is constantly becoming enlarged, Engels passes 
from the general discussion of authority to the question of the state : 

“. . . If the autonomists,” he wrote, “would confine them- 
selvefe to saying that the social organization of the future will 
restrict authority to the limits in which the relations of pro- 
duction make it inevitable, we could understand each other. 



74 


V. I. LENIN 


but they are blind to all facts which make the thing necessary, 
and they hurl themselves against the word. 

“Why don’t the anti-authoritarians confine themselves to 
crying out against political authority, against the state? All 
Socialists are agreed that the state, and with it political author- 
ity, will disappear as the result of the coming social revolution, 
i.e., that public functions will lose their political character and 
be transformed into the simple administrative functions of 
watching over real social interests. But the anti-authoritarians 
demand that the political state should be abolished at once, 
even before the Social conditions which brought it into being 
have been abolished. They demand that the first act of the 
social revolution shall be the abolition of authority. 

“Have these gentlemen ever seen a revolution? A revolution 
is undoubtedly the most authoritarian thing there is, an act 
whereby one part of the population imposes its will upon the 
other part by means of rifles, bayonets and cannon, all very 
authoritarian means; and the victorious parly mufet maintain its 
rule by means of the terror which its arms inspire in the reac- 
tionaries. Would the Paris Commune have lasted a single day 
if it had not made use of the authority of the armed people 
against the bourgeoisie? Should we not, on the contrary, re- 
proach it for having made too little use of this authority? 
Therefore either one of two things: either the anti -authoritarians 
don’t know what they are talking about, in which catee they are 
sowing nothing but confusion; or they do know, and in that 
case they are betraying the cause of the proletariat. In either 
case they serve the reaction.” (P. 39.) 

« 

This argument touches upon questions which must be examined 
in .connection with the relation between polities and economics 
during the “withering away” of Jthe state (this is dealt with in the 



THE ST4TE AND REVOLDTION 


75 


next chapter). These queistions are: the transformation of public 
functions from political functions into simple functions of admin- 
istration, and the “political state.” This last term, one particularly 
liable to cause misunderstanding, indicates the process of the 
\\itheriiig a\vay of the state: at a certain stage of its withering 
a\\ ay the moribund state can be called a non-political state. 

Again, the most remarkable thing in this passage from Engels 
is the way he states the case against the anarchists. Social-Dem- 
ocrats, the would-be disciples of Engels, have discussed this ques- 
tion with the anarchists millions of times since 1873, but they 
have not discussed it as Marxists can and should. The anarchist 
idea of the abolition of the state is muddled and non-revolutionary 
— that is how Engels put it. It is precisely the revolution in its 
rise and development, with its specific tasks in relation to violence, 
authority, power, the state, that the anarchists do not wish to see. 

This usual criticism of anarchism by present-day Social-Dem- 
ocrats has been reduced to the purest philistine banality: “We 
recognize the state, whereas the anarchists do not!” Naturally, such 
banality cannot but repel revolutionary workers who think at all. 
Engels says something different. He emphasizes the fact that all 
Socialists admit that the state will disappear afe a result of the 
Socialist revolution. He then deals with the concrete question of 
the revolution — the very question which, as a rule, the Social- 
Democrats, because of their opportunism, evade, and leave, so to 
speak, exclusively for the anarchists “to work out.” And in dealing 
■^^ith thfe question, Engels takes the bull by the horns; he asks: 
should not the Commune have made more use of the revolutionary 
power of the state, that is, of the armed proletariat organized as 
the ruling class? 

Prevailing official Social-Democracy usually dismissed the 
question of the concrete tasks of the proletariat in the revolu;ion 
either with a philistine sneer, or, at best, with the Sophistic evasion : 



76 


V I LENIN 


“wait and see.” And the anarchists were thus justified in saying 
about such Social-Democracy that it had betrayed its task of educa*^- 
ing the working class for the revolution. Engels utilizes the ex- 
perience of the last proletarian revolution precisely for the purpose 
of making a very concrete study of what the proletariat should do 
in relation to the banks and the state, and how it should do it. 


3 LETTER TO REBEL 

One of the most, if not the most, remarkable obseivations on 
the state in the works of Marx and Engels is contained in the fol- 
io, wing passage in Engels’ letter to Bebel dated March 18-28, 1875. 
Thils letter, we may observe in passing, was, as far as we know, first 
published by Bebel in the second volume of his memoits (Aus 
meinetn Leben), which appeared in 1911, i.e., thirty-six years aftei 
it had been written and mailed. 

Engels wrote to Bebel criticizing the very draft of the Gotlia 
Program which Marx also criticized in his famous letter to Biacke. 
Referring particularly to the question of the state, Engels said : 

“...The free people's state fe transformed into the fiee 
state. Taken in its grammatical sense a free state is one wheie 
the state is free in relation to its citizens and is therefore a 
state with a despotic government. The whole talk about the 
state should be dropped, elspecially since the Commune, which 
was no longer a state in the proper sense of the word. The 
‘people’s state’ has been thrown in our faces by the anarchists 
too long, although Marx’s book against Proudhon and later 
The CommuTiist Manifesto directly declare that with the in- 
troduction of the Socialist order of teociety the state will di=- 
r. solve of itself [sich auflost] and disappear. As, therefore, the 
state is only a transitional institution which is used in the 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


77 


struggle, in the revolution, in order to hold down one’s adver- 
saries hy force, it is pure nonsense to talk of a free people’s 
state; so long as the proletariat still uses the state, it does not 
use it in the interests of freedom but in order to hold down its 
adversaries, and as soon a!s it becomes possible to speak of 
freedom the state as such ceases to exist. We would therefore 
propose to replace the word ‘state’ everywhere by the word 
Gemeinwesen [community], a good old German word which 
can very well represent the French word commune.” (P. 322 
of the German original.) 

It must be borne in mind that this letter refers to the party 
jjrogram which Marx criticized in a letter dated only a few weeks 
later than the above (Marx’s letter is dated May 5, 1875, and that 
at the time Engels was living with Marx in London. Consequently, 
when he says ’“we” in the last sentence, Engels undoubtedly, in his 
own as well as in Marx’s name, suggests to the leader of the Ger- 
man workers’ party that the word “state” be struck out oj the pro- 
gram and replaced by the word “community.” 

What a howl about “anarchism” would be raised by the lead- 
ers of present-day “Marxism,” which has been faked for the con- 
venience of the opportunists, if such a rectification of the program 
were suggested to them! 

Let them howl. The bourgeoisie will praise them for it. 

But we shall go on with our work. In revising the program of 
our Party we must unfailingly take the advice of Engels and Marx 
into conteideration in order to come nearer the truth, to restore 
Marxism by purging it of distortions, to guide the struggle of the 
w'orking class for its emancipation more correctly. Certainly no 
objections to the advice of Engels and Marx will be found among 
the Bolsheviks. The only difficulty that may, perhaps, arise will*be 
in regard to terminology. In Gernmn there are two words meaning 



78 


V. I. LENIN 


“community,” of which Engels used the one which doefe not denote 
a single community, but a totality, a system of communities. In 
Russian there is no such word, and perhaps we may have to decide 
to use the French word “commune,” although this also has its 
drawbacks. 

“The Commune was no longer a state in the proper sense of 
the word” — this is the highly important theoretical statement Engels 
makes. After what has been said above, this statement is perfectly 
clear. The Commune was ceasing to be a fetate in so far as it had 
to repress, not the majority of the population, but a minority (the 
exploiters) ; it had smashed the bourgeois state machine; in place 
of a special repressive force, the whole population itself came on 
the scene. All this was a departure from the tetate in the proper sense 
of the word. And had the Commune lasted, all traces of the state 
in it would have “withered away” of themselves ; it would not ha\ e 
been necessary for it to “abolish” the institutions of the state ; they 
would have ceased to function in the measure that they ceased to 
have anything t(j do. 

“The people’s state hcis been thrown in our faces by the anarch- 
ists.” In saying this, Engels had Bakunin and his attacks on the 
German Social-Democrats particularly in mind. Engels admitted 
that these attacks were justified in so jar as the “people’s state’’ 
was as much an absurdity and as much a departure from Socialism 
as the “free people’s state.” Engels tried to put the struggle of the 
German Social-Democrats against the anarchists on right lines, to 
make this struggle correct in principle, to purge it of opportunist 
prejudices concerning the “state.” Alas! Engels’ letter was pigeon- 
holed for thirty-six years. We shall see below that, even after 
Engels’ letter was published, Kautsky obstinately repeated what 
in essence were the very mitetakes against which Engels had uttered 
his warning. 

Bebel replied to Engels in g letter, dated September 21, 1875, 



THE STAIE AND REVOLUTION 


79 


in which he wrote inter alia, that he “fully agrees” with Engels’ 
ci'iticism of the draft program, and that he had reproached Lieb- 
knecht for his readiness to make concessions (p. 304 of the German 
edition of Bebel’s Memoirs, Vol. II). But if we take Bebel’s pam- 
phlet, Our Aims, we find there arguments on the state that are 
absolutely wrong. 

“The state must be transformed from one based on class 
rule into a people’s state.” (German edition. Unsere Ziele, 
1886, p. 14.) 

This is printed in the ninth (the ninth!) edition of Bebel's 
pamphlet! It ks not surprising that such perfeistently repeated op- 
portunist views on the state were absorbed by German Social-De- 
mocracy, especially as Engels’ revolutionary interpretations had 
been safely pigeonholed, and all the conditions of life were such 
as to “wean” the people from revolution for a long time! 


4. CRITICISM OF THE DRAFT OF THE ERFUftT PROGRAM* 

In examining the Marxian doctrine of the state, the criticitem 
of the draft of the Erfurt Program sent by Engels to Kautsky on 
June 29, 1891, a criticism published only ten years later in Neue 
Zeit, cannot be ignored; for this criticism is mainly concerned with 
the opportunist views of Social-Democracy on questions of stale 
structure. 

We fehall note in passing that Engels also makes an exceeding- 
ly valuable observation on questions of economics, which shows 
how attentively and thoughtfully he watched the changes in modern 
capitalism, and how he was able to foresee to a certain extent the 


* Erjurt Program — the program adopted at the Erfurt Congress of* tht 
Social-Democratic Party of Germany m 1891.— £(1. 



«0 


V. 1. LENIN 


tasks of our own, the imperialist, epoch. Here is the passage : refer- 
ring to the word “planlesisness” (Planlosigkeit) used in the draft 
program as characteristic of capitalism, Engels w'rites : 

hen we pass from joint-stock companies to trusts which 
control and monopolize whole branches of industry, it is not 
only private production that ceases, but also planlessness” 
{Neue Zeit, Vol. XX, 1, 1901-02, p. 8j. 

Here we have what is most essential in the theoretical appraisal 
of the latest phase of capitalism, i.e., imperialism, viz., that capital- 
ism becomes monopoly capitalism. The latter must be emphasized 
because the erroneous bourgeois reformist assertion that monopoly 
■capitalism or state monopoly capitalism is no longer capitalism, but 
can already be termed “state Socialism,” or something of that sort, 
is very widespread. The trusts, of course, have not created, do not 
create now, and cannot create full and complete planning. But to 
whatever extent they do plan, to whatever extent the capitalist 
magnates calculate in advance the volume of production on a 
national and even on an international fecale, and to whatever ex- 
tent they systematically regulate it, we still remain under capital- 
ism — capitalism in its new stage, it is true, but still, undoubtedly, 
capitalism. Tire “proximity,” of such capitalism to Socialism should 
serve the genuine representatives of the proletariat a!s proof of the 
proximity, ease, feasibility and urgency of the Socialist revolution, 
and not as an argument in favour of tolerating the repudiation of 
such a revolution or in favour of making capitalism look more 
attractive, an occupation in which all the reformists are engaged. 

But let us return to the question of the state. In this letter 
Engels makes three valuable suggestions: first, as regards the re- 
public; second, as regards the connection between the national 
question and the form of state, and, third, as regards local self- 
government. 



THE STATE AND REA'Or.t.'TION 


81 


As regards the republic, Engels made this the centre of gravity 
of his criticism of the draft of the Erfurt Program. And when we 
remember what importance the Erfurt Program has acquired in 
the whole of international Social-Democracy, that it liafe become the 
model for the whole of the Second International, it may be said 
without exaggeration that Engels thereby criticized the opportunism 
of the whole Second International. 

“The political demands of the draft,” Engels writes, “have 
one great fault. What actually ought to be said is not there. . . 
(Engels’ italics.) 

And, later on, he makes it clear that the German constitution 
is but a copy of the very reactionary constitution of 1850; that 
the Reichstag is only, as Wilhelm Liebknecht put it, “the fig-leaf 
of absolutism”; and that to wish “to transform all the instruments 
of labour into public property” on the basis of a constitution 
which legalizes the existence of petty states and the federation of 
petty German states is an “obvious absurdity.” 

“To touch on that is dangerous, however,” Engels adds, know- 
ing full well that it is impossible, for reasons of legality, to include 
in the program the demand for a republic in Germany. But Engels 
does not rest content with this obvious argument which satisfied 
“everybody.” He continues: 

“And yet somehow or other the thing has got to be attacked. 
How necessary this is is shown precisely at the present time by 
the inroadb which opportunism is making in a great section of 
the Social-Democratic press. For fear of a revival of the anti- 
Socialist Law and from recollection of all manner of premature 
utterances which were let fall during the reign of that law the 
present legal position of the Parly in Germany is now all of 
a sudden to be treated as sufficient for the carrying out of all 
the demands of the Party by peaceful means.” 



82 


V. 1. LENIN 


Engels particularly stressed the fundamental fact that the 
German Social-Democrats were prompted by fear of a revival of 
the Anti-Socialist Law,* and unhesitatingly calls this opportunism; 
he declares that precisely because there was no republic and no 
freedom in Germany, the dreams of a “peaceful” path were abso- 
lutely absurd. Engels is sulhciently careful not to tie his hands. He 
admits that in republican or very free countries “one can conceive” 
(only “conceive!”) of a peaceful development towards Socialism, 
but in Germany, he repeats, 

“in Germany where the government is almost almighty and the 
Reichstag and all other representative bodies have no real 
power, to proclaim such a thing in Germany — and moreover 
when there is no need to do so — is to remove the fig-leaf from 
absolutism, and become oneself a screen for its nakedness.” 

The great majority of the official leaders of the German Social- 
Democratic Party, who pigeonholed this advice, have indeed proved 
to be a screen for absolutism. 

“Ultimately such a policy can only lead one’s own party 
astray. General abstract political questions have been put into 
the foreground, concealing thus the immediate concrete ques- 
tions, the questions which at the first great events, the first 
political crisis, put themselves on the agenda. What can result 
from this except that at the decisive moment the Party is sud- 
denly left without guidance, that unclarity and disunity reign 
on the most decisive points because these points have never 
been discussed?. . . 

“This forgetfulness of the great main standpoint in the 
momentary interests of the day, this struggling and striving for 

„ * Anti-Socialist Law — the law introduced by Bismarck in 1878, the 
express purpose of which was to suppress the Social-Democratic movement 
in Germany. It was repealed in 13^ after a long struggle. — Ed. 



THE STATE AND 8EV0LUTI0M 


83 


the success of the moment without consideration for the later 
consequences, this sacrifice of the future of the movement for 
its present may be ‘honestly’ meant, but it is and remains op- 
portunism, and ‘honest’ opportunism is perhaps the most dan- 
gerous of all. 

“If one thing is certain it is that our Party and the working 
class can only come to power under the form of the democratic 
republic. Thite is even the specific form for the dictatorship of 
the proletariat as the Great French Revolution has already 
shown. . . .” 

Engels repeats here in a particularly striking manner the funda- 
mental idea which runs like a red thread through all of Marx’s 
works, namely, that the democratic republic is the nearest ap- 
proach to the dictatorship of the proletariat. For such a republic — 
without in the least abolishing the domination of capital, and, 
therefore, the oppression of the masses and the class struggle — 
inevitably leads to such an extension, development, unfolding and 
intensification of that struggle that, as soon as the possibility arises 
of satisfying the fundamental interests of the oppressed masses, 
this possibility is achieved inevitably and solely in the dictatorship 
of the proletariat, in the leadership of those masses by the proletar- 
iat. These, too, are “forgotten words” of Marxism for the whole 
of the Second International, and this forgetfulness was demonstrat- 
ed with particular vividness by the history of the Menshevik Party 
in the first half year of the Russian Revolution of 1917. 

On the question of a federal republic, in connection with the 
national composition of the population, Engelfe wrote: 

“What should take the place of present-day Germany?” 
(with its reactionary monarchical constitution and its equally 
reactionary division into petty states, which perpetuates allethe 
specific features of “Prussianism” instead of dissolving them 



84 


V. I. LE.NIX 


in Germany as a whole.) “In my view, the proletariat ean only 
use the form of the one and indivisible republic. In the gigantic 
territory of the United States a federal republic is still, on the 
whole, a necessity, although in the Eastern etatefe it is already 
becoming a hindrance. It would be a step forward in England, 
where the two islands are peopled by four nations and in spite 
of a single Parliament three different systems of legislation 
exist side by Side even today. In little Switzerland, it has long 
been a hindrance, tolerable only because Switzerland is content 
to be a purely passive member of the European state system. 
For Germany, federation of the Swiss type would be an enor- 
mous step backward. Tv.;o points distinguish a federal state 
from a unitary state; first, that each separate federated state, 
each canton, has its own civil and criminal legislative and 
judicial system, and, second, that alongside of a popular cham- 
ber there is also a federal chamber in which each canton, largo 
or small, votes as such,” 


In Germany the federal state is the transitional stage to the 
complete unitary state, and the “revolution from above” of 1066 
and 1870* must not be reversed but supplemented by a “movement 
from below.” 

Engels did not display indifference to the question of the forms 
of state; on the contrary, he tried to analylse the transitional forms 
with the utmost care in order to establish, in accordance with the 
concrete, historical, specific features of each separate case, from 
what and into what the given transitional form is evolving. 


“ Engels refers here to the reunion of the dismembered German state 
into a single state which was being carried out by the ruling clique of 
Prussia “from above,” by military force. Prussia’s war against AusUia in 
ISftd led to the formation of the North-German Confederation of German 
states: the Franco-Prussian War of 1870 resulted in the founding of the 
German empire headed by Prussia. — Ed. 



THE STATE AND REVOIDTION 


86 


From the point of view of the proletariat and the proletarian 
revolution Engels, like Marx, insisted on democratic centralism, 
on one indivisible republic. He regarded the federal republic either 
a& an exception and a hindrance to development, or as a transitional 
form from a monarchy to a centralized republic, as a “step for- 
ward"’ under certain special conditions. And in these special condi- 
tions, the national question comes to the front. 

In spile of their ruthless criticism of the reactionary nature of 
small states, and, in certain concrete cafees, the screening of this by 
the national question, Engels and Marx never betrayed a trace of 
a desire to evade the national question — a desire of which the Dutch 
and Polish Marxists arc often guilty, as a result of their very 
justifiable opposition to the narrow philistine nationalism of 
“their” little states. 

Even in regard to England, where geographical conditions, a 
common language and the history of many centuries would seem 
to have “put an end’’ to the national question in the separate small 
divisions of England — even in regard to this country. Engels took 
into account the patent fact that the national question had not )et 
been settled, and recognized in consequence that the establishment 
of a federal republic would be a “step forward.’’ Of course, there 
is not a trace here of an attempt to abandon tlie criticism of the 
defects of a federal republic of the most determined propaganda 
and struggle for a united and centralized democratic republic. 

But Engels did not interpret democratic centralism in the 
bureaucratic sense in which this term is used by bourgeois and 
petty-bourgeois ideologists, including the anarchists. His interpreta- 
tion did not in the least preclude such wide local self-government 
as would combine the voluntary defence of the unity of the state 
by the “communes” and districts with the complete abolition of 
all bureaucracy and all “ordering” from above. Enlarging on-'the 
program viewfe of Marxism on t|}e state. Engels wrote: 



86 


V. 1. LENIN 


“So, then, a unitary republic — but not in the sense of the 
present French Republic, which is nothing but the Empire 
established in 1798 minus the Emperor. From 1792 to 1798 
each Department of France, each commune (Gemeinde) en- 
joyed complete self-government on the American model, and 
this is what we too must have. How self-government is to be 
organized and how we can manage without a bureaucracy has 
been shown by America and the first French Republic, and is 
being shown even today by Canada, Australia and the other 
English colonies. And a provincial and local self-government 
of this type is far freer than Swiss federalism under which, it 
is true, the canton is very independent in relation to the Bund” 
(i.e., the federated state as a whole), “but is also independent 
in relation to the district and the commune. The cantonal 
governments appoint the district governors {BezirksstaUhalter) 
and prefects — a feature which is unknown in English-speak- 
ing countries and which we shall have to abolish here in the 
future along with the Prussian Landr'dte and Regierungsrdte 
(commissaries, district police chiefs, governors, and in general 
all ofiBcials appointed from above). 

Accordingly, Engels proposes the following wording for the 
clause in the program on self-government: 

“Complete self-government for the provinces” (districts 
and communities) “through officials elected by universal suf- 
frage. The abolition of all local and provincial authorities ap- 
pointed by the state.” 

I have already had occasion to point out — in Pravda* (No. 68, 
May 28, 1917), which was suppressed by the government of 


* Pravda {Truth ) — a legal daily Bolshevik newspaper, began publica- 
tion in St. Petersburg on April 22 (May 5), 1912. It was organized and 
directed by Lenin and Stalin. The newspaper was subjected to constant 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


87 


Kerensky and other “Socialist” Ministeis** — how in this connec- 
tion (of course, not only in this connection by any means) our 
alleged Socialist representatives of alleged-revolutionary alleged- 
democracy have departed from democracy in the most scandalous 
manner. Naturally, people who have bound themselves by a “coali- 
tion” with the imperialist bourgeoisie have remained deaf to this 
criticism. 

It is extremely important to note that Engels, armed with facts, 
disproves by a precise example the prejudice that is very wide- 
spread, particularly among petty-bourgeois democrats, that a federal 
republic necessarily means a greater amount of freedom than a 
centralized republic. This is not true. It is disproved by the facts 
cited by Engels regarding the centralized French Republic of 
1792-98 and the federal Swiss Republic. The really democratic 
centralized republic gave more freedom than the federal republic. 
In other words, the greatest amount of local, provincial and other 
freedom known in history was granted by a centralized and not by 
a federal republic. 

Insufficient attention has been and is being paid to this fact 
in our Party propaganda and agitation, as, indeed, to the whole 
question of federal and centralized republics and local self- 
government. 


persecution by the government and was repeatedly suppressed, reappearing 
under different names, as for example: Rabochaya Pravda (Worhers' Truth), 
Proletarskaya Pravda {Proletarian Truth), etc. It was suppressed by the 
government in July 1914, on the eve of the first world war, and resumed 
publication, as the Central Organ of the Bolsheviks, only after the over- 
throw of tsarism in March 1917. In July 1917 it was published semi-legally 
and came out under different names. It began to come out again under its 
old name on November 7, 1917. In March 1918 the editorial offices were 
transferred to Moscow, and since that time it has appeared as the organ 
of the Central Committee and Moscow Committee of the C.P.S.U.(B)c— £d. 

** See “A Question of Principle. ‘Forgotten Words’ of Democracy” in 
Lenin, Collected Works, Eng. ed., V>}1. XX, Book 11. — Ed. 



S8 


V I I ENIN 


5. THE 1891 INTRODUCTION TO MARX’S 
“THE CIVIL WAR IN FRANCE” 

In his Introduclion to the third edition of 77tc Civil If ar in 
France (this Introduction is dated March 18, 1891, and was origi- 
nally published in the Neue Zeit), Engels, in addition to many other 
interesting incidental remarks on questions connected with the al- 
titude towards the stale, gives a remarkably striking resume of the 
lessons of the Commune. This resume, which was rendered more 
profound by the entire experience of the twenty years that separated 
the author from the Commune, and which was directed particularly 
again.'^t the “superstitious belief in the state” so widespread iu 
Germany, may justly be called the word of Marxism on the 
question dealt with here. 

In France, Engels observes, the workers were armed after every 
revolution: 

. . therefore the disarming of the workers was the first 
commandment of the bourgeois at the helm of the state. Hence, 
after every revolution won by the workers, a new struggle, 
ending with the defeat of the workers, ” 

This resume of the experience of bouigeois revolutions is a's 
concise as it is expressive. The essence of the matter — also, by the 
way. of the question of the state {has the oppressed 
class arm s ?) — is here remarkably well defined. It is precisely 
this essential thing which is most often ignored by professors, who 
are influenced by bourgeois ideology, as well as by petty-bourgeois 
democrats. In the Russian Revolution of 1917, the honour (Cavaig- 
nac honour"’) of babbling this secret of bourgeois revolution fell 


* Cavaignac (1802-1857 ) — a French general who suppressed the iii- 
smrection of the Paris workere in Jitne 1848 with incredible ferocity.— Ed. 



THE STATE AND RETOWJTION 


S9 


to the Menshevik, ‘ also-Marxist,’’ Tsereteli. In his ‘'historic” 
speech of June 9, Tsereteli blurted out the determination of the 
bourgeoisie to disarm the Petrograd workers — referring, of course, 
to this decision as his own, and as a vita! necessity for the 
“state”! 

Tsereteli’s historic speech of June 9, will, of coui-Sc, serve 
every historian of the Revolution of 1917 as one of the most 
striking illustrations of how the Socialist-Revolutionary and 
Menshevik bloc, led by Mr. Tsereteli, deserted to the side of the 
bourgeoisie against the revolutionary proletariat. 

Another incidental remark of Engels’, also connected w ilh the 
qui^tion of the state, deals with religion. It is well known that 
German Social-Democracy, as it decayed and became more and 
more opportunist, slipped more and more frequently into the phi- 
listine misinterpretation of the celebrated formula: “Religion is 
a private matter.” That is, this formula was twisted to mean that 
religion was a private matter even for the party of the revolutionary 
proletariat!! It was against this utter betrayal of the revolutionary 
program of the proletariat that Engels protected. In 1891 he saw 
only the very feeble beginnings of opportunism in his party, and. 
therefore, he expressed himself on the subject very cautiously: 

“. . . As almost without exception workers or recognized 
representatives of the workers, teat in the Commune, its decision.^ 
bore a decidedly proletarian character. Either they decreed 
reforms which the republican bourgeoisie had failed to pass 
solely out of cowardice, but which provided a necessary basis 
for the free activity of the working class — such ate the realiza- 
tion of the principle that in relation to the state, religion is 
purely a private matter — or they promulgated decrees which 
tvere in the direct interests of the working class and to some 
extent cut deeplv into the old*order of society.” 



90 


V I LENIN 


Engels deliberately emphasized the words “in relation to the 
State,” as a straight thrust at the German opportunism, which had 
declared religion to be a private matter in relation to the Party, 
thus degrading the party of the revolutionary proletariat to the 
level of the most vulgar “free-thinking” philistinism, which is pre- 
pared to allow a non-denominational status, but which renounces the 
Party struggle against the religious opium which stupefies the people. 

The future historian of German Sooial-Democracy, in investi- 
gating the basic causes of its shameful collapse in 1914, will find 
no lack of interesting material on this question, from the evasive 
declarations in the articles of the ideological leader of the party, 
Kautsky, which open wide the door to opportunism, to the attitude 
of the Party towards the Los-von-Kirche-Bewegung (the “leave the 
church” movement) in 1913. 

But let us see how, twenty years after the Commune, Engels 
summed up ite lessons for the fighting proletariat. 

Here are the lessons to which Engels attached prime importance: 

. . It was precisely the oppressing power of the former 
centralized government, army, political police and bureaucracy, 
which Napoleon had created in 1798 and since then had been 
taken over by every new government as a welcome instrument 
and used against its opponents, it was precisely this power 
which was to fall everywhere, just as it had already fallen in 
Paris. 

“From the outset the Commune was compelled to recognize 
that the working class, once come to power, could not 
manage with the old state machine; that in order not to lose 
again its only just conquered supremacy, this working class 
must, on the one hand, do away with all the old repressive 
machinery previously used against it itself, and, on the other, 
safeguard itself against it^ own deputies and officials, by 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


91 


declaring them all, without exception, subject to recall at any 
moment. . . 

Engels emphasizes again and again that the state remains a 
state, i.e,, it retains its fundamental characteristic feature of trans- 
forming the officials, the “servants of society,” its organs, into the 
Piasters of society not only under a monarchy, but also in a dem- 
ocratic republic. . . 

“Against this transformation of the state and the organs of 
the state from servants of society into -masters of society — an 
inevitable transformation in all previous states — the Commune 
made use of two infallible expedients. In the first place, it 
filled all posts — administrative, judicial and educational — by 
election on the basis of universal suffrage of all concerned, 
with the right of the same electors to recall their delegate at 
any time. And, in the second place, all officials, high or low, 
were paid only the wages received by other workerte. The high- 
est salary paid by the Commune to anyone was 6,000 francs.* 
“In this way, an effective barrier to place hunting and 
careerism was set up, even apart from the binding mandates** 
to delegates to representative bodies which were also added in 
profusion. . . .” 

Engels here approaches the interesting boundary line at which 
consistent democracy is transformed into Socialism and at which 


* Nominally about 2,400 rubles; according to the present rale of 
exchange about 6,000 rubles. Those Bolsheviks who propose that a salary 
of 9,000 rubles be paid to members of municipal councils, for instance, 
instead of a maximum salary of 6,000 rubles — quite an adequate sum — jor the 
whole state are committing an unpardonable error. a 

** Imperative mandates, i.e., binding instructions given to a member 
of parliament by his constituents as -to his line of conduct in parliament. 
Failure to carry out these instructions entails the member’s recall. — Ed. 



93 


V. I. LENIN 


it demands Socialism. For, in order to abolish the state, the func- 
tions of the civil service must be converted into the simple opera- 
tions of control and accounting that can be performed by the vast 
majority of the population, and, ultimately, by every single indi- 
vidual. And in order to abolish careerism completely it must be 
made impossible for “honourable” though unremunerated 
posts in the public sei-vice to be used as a springboard to highly 
remunerative posts in banks or joint-stock companies, as constantly 
happens in all the freest capitalist countries. 

But Engels did not make the mistake some Marxists make in 
dealing, for example, with the right of nations to self-determination, 
tNhen they argue that this is impossible under capitalism and will 
be unnecessary under Socialism. Such a seemingly clever but really 
incorrect statement might be made in regard to any democratic 
institution, including moderate salaries for officials; because fully 
consistent democracy is impossible under capitalism, and under 
Socialism all democracy withers away. 

It is a sophistry that is similar to the old humorous problem: 
will a man become bald if he loses one m.ore hair? 

To develop democracy to its logical conclusion, to find the 
forms for this development, to test them by practice, and so forth — 
all this is one of the constituent tasks of the struggle for the social 
revolution. Taken separately, no sort of democracy will bring 
Socialism. But in actual life democracy will never be “taken Isep- 
arately”; it will be “taken together” with other things, it will 
exert its influence on economics, will stimulate its transformation; 
and in its turn it will be influenced by economic development, and 
so on. Such are the dialectics of living history. 

Engels continues; 

O 

“This shattering {Sprengutig) of the former stale power 
and its replacement by a fiew and really democratic state is 



THE STATE A^D REVOLUTION 


93 


described in detail in the third section of the Civil War. But it 
was necessary to dwell briefly here once more on some of its 
features, because in Germany particularly the superstitious 
belief in the state has been carried over from philosophy into 
the general consciousness of the bourgeoisie and even of many 
workers. According to the philosophical notion, the state is 
the ‘realization of the idea,’ or the Kingdom of God on earth, 
translated into philosophical terms, the sphere in which eternal 
truth and justice is or should be realized. And from this follows 
a superstitious reverence for the state and everything connected 
with it, which takes root the more readily as people from their 
childhood are accustomed to imagine that the affairs and in- 
terests common to the whole of society could not be looked after 
otherwise than as they have been looked after in the past, that 
is, through the state and its well-paid officials. And people 
think they have taken quite an extraordinarily bold step forward 
when they have rid themselves of belief in hereditary monarchy 
and swear by the democratic republic. In reality, however, 
the state is nothing but a machine for the oppression of one 
class by another, and indeed in the democratic republic no less 
than in the monarchy; and at best an evil inherited by the 
proletariat after its victorious struggle for class supremacy, 
whose woree sides the victorious proletariat, just like the 
Commune, cannot avoid having to lop off at the earliest pos- 
sible moment, until such time as a new generation, reared in 
new and free social conditions, will be able to throw the entire 
lumber of the state on the scrap-heap.” 

Engels warned the Germans not to forget the fundamentals of 
Socialism on the question of the state in general in connection with 
the substitution of a republic for the monarchy. His warnings now 
read like a lecture to Messrs. Tsereteli and Chernov, who in their 



V. 1. LENIN 


“coalition” practice revealed a superstitious belief in and a su- 
perstitious reverence for the state! 

Two more points. First: the fact that Engels Said that in a 
democratic republic, “no less” than in a monarchy, the state re- 
mains a ‘‘machine for the oppression of one class by another” does 
not signify that the jorm of oppression is a matter of indifference 
to the proletariat, as some anarchists “teach.” A wider, freer and 
more open jorm of the class struggle and of class oppression greatly 
assists the proletariat in its struggle for the abolition of all clasSes. 

Second; why will only a new generation be able to throw the 
entire lumber of the state on the scrap-heap? This question is bound 
up with the question of overcoming democracy, with which we shall 
deal now. 


6. ENGELS ON OVERCOMING DEMOCRACY. 

Engels had occasion to speak on this subject in connection 
with the question of the term “Social-Democrat” being scientifi- 
cally wrong. 

In a preface to an edition of his articles of the ’seventies on 
various subjects, mainly on “international” questions (Internatio- 
nales alls dem Vollcsslaat), dated January 3, 1894, i.e., written a 
year and a half before his death, Engels wrote that in all his 
articles he used the rvord “Communist” not “Social-Democrat,” be- 
cause at that time it was the Proudhonites in France and the Las- 
salleans in Germany who called themselves Social-Democrats. 

“For Marx and me it was therefore quite impossible to 
chose such an elastic term to characterize our special point 
of view. Today things are different, and the word [“Social- 
Democrat”] may perhaps pass muster [mag passieren] , however 
' unsuitable [unpassend[ it still is for a party whose economic 
program is not merely Socialist in general, but directly Com- 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


96 


munist, and whose uldmate political aim is to overcome the 
whole state and therefore democracy as well. The name of 
genuine [Engels’ italics] political parties, however, are never 
wholly appropriate; the party develops while the name per- 
sists.” 

The dialectician Engels remains true to dialectics to the end of 
hfe days. Marx and I, he says, had a splendid, scientifically exact 
name for the party, but there was no real party, i.e., no proletarian 
mass party. Now, at the end of the nineteenth century, there is a 
real party, but its name is scientifically inexact. Never mind, it will 
“pass muster,” if only the party develops, if only the scientific 
inexactness of its name is not hidden from it and does not hinder 
ite development in the right direction! 

Perhaps some humourist will begin consoling us Bolsheviks 
in the manner of Engels: we have a genuine party, it is developing 
splendidly; even such a meaningless and ugly term as “Bolshevik” 
will “pass muster,” although it expresses nothing but the purely 
accidental fact that at the Brussels-London Congress of 1903 we 
were in the majority. . . .* Perhaps now that the persecution of 

^ The reference here is to the Second Congress of the Russian Social- 
Democratic Labour Party which was held in July-August 1903. The congress 
first met in Brussels, but owing to police persecution it transferred its 
sittings to London, The Second Congress plays an enormous part in the 
history of the Party. It was at this congress that the Russian Social-Dem- 
ocratic Labour Party was actually formed, it was at this congress that a 
P-arty Program and Rules were adopted and the central leading organs of 
the Party set up. The struggle between the two trends within the Russian 
Social-Democratic Labour Party (the revolutionary trend — led by Lenin, 
and the opportunist led by Martov) developed at the congress mainly 
around questions of organization and resulted in the Party splitting into 
two groups: Bolsheviks and Mensheviks. These names are connected with 
the results of the elections to the central leading organs of the Party. 
Lenin’s followers, who received the majority of votes in the elections at 
the congress, have since been called Bolsheviks (from bolshinstvo, majority), 
and Lenin’s opponents, who received the minority of votes, have since been 
called Mensheviks (from menshmstvo.j minority). — Ed. 



96 


Y. I. LENIN 


our Party by republican and “revoluiionary” petty-bourgeois 
democracy in July and August"!* has made the name “Bolshevik” 
such a universally respected one; that, in addition, this persecution 
signalizes the great historical progress , our Party has made in its 
actual development, even I would hesitate to insist on the sugges- 
tion I made in April to change the name of our Party. Perhaps I 
would propose a “compromise” to our comrades, viz., to call 
ourselves the Communist Party, but to retain the word “Bolshe- 
viks” in brackets. . . . 

But the question of the name of the Party is incomparably less 
iinportant than the question of the attitude of the revolutionary 
proletariat to the state. 

In the arguments usually advanced about the state, the mistake 
is constantly made against which Engels uttered his warning and 
which we have in passing indicated above, namely, it is constantly 
forgotten that the abolition of the state means also the abolition of 
democracy; that t he withering away of the state means the witherin g 
a way of democracy. P ? 

At first sight this assertion seems exceedingly strange and in- 
comprehensible; indeed, someone may even begin to fear that we are 
expecting the advent of an order of society in which the principle 
of the subordination of the minority to the majority will not be 
respected — for is not democracy the recognition of this principle? 

■'* This refers to the events in Petrograd on July 3-5 [16-18] 1917. During 
those days huge demonstrations of workers and soldiers took place demand- 
ing the transfer of power to the Soviets. Notwithstanding the peaceful 
character of the demonstrations, the bourgeois Provisional Government, 
headed by Kerensky, sent troops against the demonstrators. After suppress- 
ing the demonstration, the government began to persecute the Bolshevik 
Party, suppressed Pravda, the Central Organ of the Bolsheviks, issued a 
warrant for the arrest of Lenin, who was obliged to go into hiding, and 
ai rested a number of prominent leaders of the Bolshevik Party. In spite 
of diese conditions, however, the Party succeeded, under the leadership of 
I.enin and .Stalin, in preparing the ground for the victory of the prole- 
tarian revolution in October (Noveiniier) 1917. — Ed. 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


97 


No, democracy is not idenlical with the subordination of the 
minority to the majority. Democracy is a state which recognizes 
the subordination of the minority to the majority, i.e., an organ- 
ization for the systematic use of violence by one class against the 
other, by one section of the population against another. 

We set ourselves the ultimate aim of abolishing the state, i.c., 
all organized and systematic violence, all utee of violence against 
man in general. We do not expect the advent of an order of society 
in which the principle of the subordination of the minority to the 
majority will not be observed. But in striving for Socialism we are 
convinced that it will develop into Communism and, hence, that 
the need for violence against people in general, the need for the 
subjection of one man to another, and of one section of the popula- 
tion to another, will vanish, since people will become accustomed 
to observing the elementaiy conditions of social life without jorce 
and without subordination. 

In order to emphasize this element of habit, Engels speaks of 
a new generation, “reared in new and free social conditions,” which 
“will be able to throw the entire lumber of the state” — of every 
kind of state, including even the democratic-republican state — “on 
the scrap-heap.” 

In order to explain this it is nec^sary to examine the question 
of the economic basite of the withering away of the state. 



Chapter V 


THE ECONOMIC BASIS OF THE WITHERING 
AWAY OF THE STATE 

Marx explains this question most thoroughly in his Critique oj 
the Gotha Piograni (letter to Bracke, May 5, 1875, which was not 
printed until 1891 in Neue Zeit, Vol. IX, I, and which has appeared 
in a special Russian edition). The polemical part of this remarka- 
ble woik, which consists of a criticism of Lassalleanism, has, so to 
speak, overshadowed its positive part, namely, the analysis of the 
connection between the development of Communism and the wither- 
ing away of the state. 


1. MARX’S PRESENTATION OF THE QUESTION 

From a superficial comparison of Marx’s letter to Bracke of 
May 5, 1875, with Engels’ letter to Bebel of March 28, 1875, which 
we examined above, it might appear that Marx was much more 
“pro-state’’ than Engels, and that the difference of opinion between 
the two writers on the question of the state was very considerab^ 
Engels suggested to Bebel that all the chatter about the state 
he dropped; that the word “state” be eliminated from the program 
altogether and the word “community” substituted for it. Engels even 
declared that the Commune was really no longer a tetate in the 
proper senas of the word. Yet Marx spoke of the “future state in 


9ii 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


99 


Communist society,” i.e., as though he recognized the need for a 
state even under Communism. 

But such a view would be fundamentally wrong. A closer ex* 
amination shows that Marx’s and Engels’ views on the state and 
its withering away were completely identical, and that Marx’s ex- 
pression quoted above refers merely to this withering away of the 
state. 

Clearly there can be no question of defining the exact moment 
of the future “withering away” — the more so since it must obvious- 
ly be a rather lengthy process. The apparent difference between Marx 
and Engels is due to the different subjects they dealt with, the 
different ahns they were pursuing. Engels set out to show Bebel 
plainly, sharply and in broad outline the absurdity of the prevail- 
fcg prejudices concerning the state, which were shared to no small 
Begree by Lassalle. Marx only touched upon this question in pas- 
sing, being interested in another subject, viz., the development of 
Communist society. 

The whole theory of Marx is an application of the theory of 
development — in its most consistent, complete, thought-out and re- 
plete form — to modem capitalism. Naturally, Marx was faced with 
the question of applying this theory both to the forthcoming col- 
lapse of capitalism and to the future development of future Com- 
munism. 

On the basis of what data can the question of the future devel- 
opment of future Communism be raised? 

On the basis of the fact that it has its origin in capitalism, that 
it develops historically from capitalism, that it iS the result of the 
action of a social force to which capitalism has given birth. There 
is no trace of an attempt on Marx’s part to conjure up a utopia, to 
make idle guesses about what cannot be known. Marx treats the 
question of Communism in the same way as a naturalist would 



100 


V. l. LENIN 


treat the question of the development, say, of a new biological 
species, if he knew that such and such was its origin and such and 
such the direction in which it was changing. 

Marx, first of all, brushes aside the confusion the Gotha Pro- 
gram brings into the question of the relation betrveen state and 
Society. He ryrites: 

''^JiH’resent-day society’ is capitalist society, which exists in 
^11 civilized countries, more or less Iree from mediaeval ad- 
' mixture, more or less modified by the special historical de- 
velopment of each country and more or less developed. On 
the other hand, the ‘present-day state’ changes with a country’s 
frontier. It is different in the Prusso-German Empire from what 
it is in Switzerlai^it is different in England from what it is in 
the United States."^The ‘present-day stale’ is therefore a fiction. 

“Nevertheless, the different states of the different civilized 
countries, in spite of their manifold diversity of form, all have 
this in common, that they are based on modern bourgeois so- 
ciety, only one more or le!ss capitalistically develojied. They 
have, therefore, also certain essential features in common. In 
this sense it is possible to speak of the ‘present-day state,’ in 
contrast to the future, in which its present root, bourgeois So- 
ciety, will have died away. 

“The question then arises: what transformation will the 
state undergo in Communist society? In other words, what 
social functions will remain in existence there that are analo- 
gous to the present functions of the state? This question can 
only be answered scientifically and one does not get a flea-hop 
nearer to the problem by a thousand-fold combination of the 
word people with the word state. . . 

I Having thus ridiculed all talk about a “people’s state,” Marx 
formulates the question and warns us. as it were, that to arrive 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


101 


at a scientific answer one must rely only on firmly established 
scientific data. 

The first fact that has been established with complete exacti- 
tude by the whole theory of development, by tecience as a whole — 
a fact which the Utopians forgot, and which is forgotten by the 
present-day opportunists who are afraid of the Socialist revolu- 
tion — is that, historically, there must undoubtedly he a special stage 
or a special phase of transition from capitalism to Communism. 


2. THE TRANSITION FROM CAPITALISM TO COMMUNISM 
Marx continues; 

“Between capitalist and Communist society lies ihe period 
of the revolutionary transformation of the one into the other. 
There corresponds to this also a political transition period in 
which the State can be nothing but the revolutionary dictatorship 
of the proletarial.” 

Marx bases this conclusion on an analysis of the role played 
by the proletariat in modern capitalist society, on the data con- 
cerning the development of this society, and on the irreconcilabi- 
lity of the antagonistic interests of the proletariat and the bour- 
geoisie. 

Earlier the question wats put in this way: in order to achieve 
its emancipation, the proletariat must overthrow the bourgeoisie, 
conquer political power and establish its revolutionary dictatorship. 

Now the question is put somewhat differently: the transition 
from capitalist society— which is developing towards Communism 
— to a Communist society is impossible without a “political tran- 
sition period,” and the state in this period can only be the revo- 
lutionary dictatorship of the proletariat. 

What, then, is the relation of 4his dictatorship to democracy? 



102 


V. I. lEXIN 


We have seen that The Communist Manifesto simply places 
the two ideas side by si-de: “to raise the proletariat to the position 
of the ruling class” and “to win the battle of democracy.” On the 
basis of all that has been said above, it is possible to determine 
more precisely how democracy changefe in the transition from 
capitalism to Communism. 

In capitalist society, under the conditions most favourable to 
its development, we have more or less complete democracy in the 
democratic republic. But this democracy is always restricted by the 
narrow framework of capitalist exploitation, and consequently 
always remains, in reality, a democracy for the minority, only 
for the possessing classes, only for the rich. Freedom in capitalist 
society always remains about the same ab it was in the ancient 
Greek republics: freedom for the slave-owners. Owing to the con- 
ditions of capitalist exploitation the modern wage-slaves are so 
crushed by want and poverty that “they cannot be bothered with 
democracy,” “they cannot be bothered with politics”; in the ordi- 
nary peaceful course of eventb the majority of the population is 
debarred from participating in social and political life. 

The correctness of this statement is perhaps most clearly proved 
by Germany, precisely because in that country constitutional legal- 
ity lasted and remained stable for a remarkably long time — for 
nearly half a century (1871-1914) — and Social-Democracy during 
this period wab able to achieve far more in Germany than in other 
countries in the way of “utilizing legality,” and was able to organ- 
ize a larger proportion of the workers into a political party than 
anywhere else in the world. 

What is this largest proportion of politically conscious and 
active wage-slaves that has so far been observed in capitalist so- 
ciety? One million members of the Social-Democratic Party — out 
of fifteen million wage workers! Tliree million organized in trade 
unions — out of fifteen million!* 



THE STATE 4Ni> nE'.OI.UTlON 


103 


Democracy for an insignificant minority, democracy for -the 
rich — that is the democracy of capitalist society. If we look more 
closely into the mechanism of capitalist democracy, everywhere, 
in the “petty” — so-called petty — details of the suffrage (residential 
qualification, exclusion of women, etc.), in the technique of the 
representative institutions, in the actual obstacles to the right of 
assembly (public buildings are not for “beggars”!), in the purely 
capitalist orgsmization of the daily press, ^c., etc., — we see restric- 
tion after restriction upon democracyTThese restrictions, excep- 
tions,. exclusions, obstacles for the poor, seem slight, especially in 
the eyes of one who has never known want himself and has never 
been in close contact with the oppressed classes in their mass 
life (and nine-tenths if not ninety-nine hundredths, of the bour- 
geois publicists and politicians are of this category) ; but in their 
sum total these restrictions exclude and squeeze out the poor from 
politics, from taking an active part in democracy. 

Marx grasped this essence of capitalist democracy splendid- 
ly, when, in analysing the experience of the Commune, he said 
that the oppressed are allowed once every few years to decide 
which particular representatives of the oppressing class should 
represent and repress them in parliament! ' 

But from this capitalist democracy — inevitably narrow, tacitly 
repelling the poor, and therefore hypocritical and false to the core 
— forward development does not proceed simply, directly and 
smoothly to “greater and greater democracy,” as the liberal pro- 
fessors and petty-bourgeois opportunists would have us believe. 
No, forward development, i.e., towards Communism, proceeds 
through the dictatorship of the proletariat, and cannot do other- 
wise, for the resistance of the capitalist exploiters cannot be broken 
by anyone else or in any other way. 

But the dictatorship of the proletariat, i.e., the organization of 
the vanguard of the oppressed as the ruling class for the purpose 



V. I. LENIN 


10 i 

of crushing the oppressors, cannot result merely in an expansion 
of democracy. Simultaneously with an immense expansion of democ- 
racy, which /or the first time becomes democracy for the 
poor, democracy for the people, and not democracy for the rich, 
the dictatorship of the proletariat imposes a series of restrictions 
on the freedom of the oppressor's, the exploiters, the capitalists. 
We must crush them in order to free humanity from wage-slavery; 
their resistance must be broken by force; it is clear that where 
there is suppression, where there is coercion, there is no freedom 
and no democracy. 

Engels expressed this splendidly in his letter to Bebel when 
he said, as the reader will remember, that 

“so long as the proletariat still uses the fetate, it does not use 
it in the interests of freedom but in order to hold down its 
adversaries, and as soon as it becomes posteible to speak of 
freedom the state as such ceases to exist 

Democracy for the vast majority of the people, and suppres- 
sion by force, i.e., exclusion from democracy, of the exploiters and 
oppressors of the people — this is the change democracy undergoes 
during the transition from capitalism to Communism. 

Only in Communist society, when the resistance of the capital- 
ists has been completely broken, when the capitalists have disap- 
peared, when there are no classes (i.e., when there is no difference 
between the membetfe of society as regards their relation to the 
social means of production), only then does “the state , . . cease 
to exist,” and it “becomes possible to speak of freedom” Only 
then will really complete democracy, democracy without any 
exceptions, be possible and be realized. And only then will de- 
mocracy begin to wither away, owing to the simple fact that freed 
from* capitalist slavery, from the untold horrors, savagery, absurd- 
ities and infamies of capitalist exploitation, people will gradually 



THE STATE \ND RE\0LU1I0N 


105 


become accustomed lo observing the elementar)' rules of 
social intercourse that have been known for centuries and rejDeated 
for thousands of years in all copy-book maxims; they will become 
accustomed to observing them without force, without compulsion, 
w'ithout subordination, without the special appa- 
ratus for compulsion which is called the state. 

The expression “the state withers away'’ is very well chosen. 
lor it indicates both the gradual and the spontaneouls nature of 
the process. Only habit can, and undoubtedly will, have such an 
effect; for we see around us millions of times how readily people 
become accustomed to observing the necessary rules of social in- 
tercourtee if there is no exploitation, if there is nothing that causes 
indignation, nothing that calls forth protest and revolt or evokes 
the necessity for suppression. 

Thus in capitalist society we have a democracy that is curtailed, 
wretched, false; a democracy only for the rich, for the minor- 
ity. The dictatorship of the proletariat, the period of transition to 
Communism, will for the first time create democracy for the 
people, for the majority, in addition to the necessary suppression 
of the minority— the exploiters. Communism alone is capable of 
giving really complete democracy, and the more complete it is the 
more quickly will it become unnecessary and wither away of itself. 

In other words: under capitalism we have a state in the proper 
teense of the word, that is, a special machine for the suppression 
of one class by another, and of the majority by the minority at 
that. Naturally, the successful discharge of such a task as the 
systematic suppression of the exploited majority by the exploiting 
minority calls for the greatest ferocity and savagery in the work 
of suppression, it calls for seas of blood through which mankind 
has to wade in slavery, teerfdom and wage labour. i 

Furthermore, during the transition from capitalism to Com- 
munism siinmession is still necessary; but it is now the suppres- 



106 


V. I I ENIN 


sion of the exploiting minority by the exploited majority. A special 
apparatus, a special machine for suppression, the “state,” is still 
necessary, but this is now a transitory state; it is no longer a tetate 
in the proper sense; for the suppression of the minority of exploit- 
ers by the majority of the wage-slaves of yesterday is comparative- 
ly so easy, simple and natural a task that it will entail far less 
bloodshed than the feuppression of the risings of slaves, serfs or 
wage labourers, and it will cost mankind far less. And it is com- 
patible TOth the extension of democracy to such an overwhelming 
majority of the population that the need for a special machine of 
suppression will begin to disappear. The exploiters are naturally 
unable to suppress the people without a veiy complex machine for 
performing this task; but the people can suppress the exploiters 
even with a very simple “machine,” almost without a “machine,” 
without a special apparatus, by the simple organization of the 
armed masses (Such as the Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Depu- 
ties, we may remark, running ahead a little). 

Finally, only Communism makes the slate absolutely unneces- 
sary, for there is nobody to be suppressed^ — “nobody” in the senSe 
of a class, in the sense of a systematic struggle against a definite 
section of the population. We are not Utopians, and we do not in 
the least deny the possibility and inevitability of excesses on the 
part of individual persons, or the need to suppress such excesses. 
But, in the first place, no special machine, no special apparatus 
of repression is needed for thiS; this will be done by the armed 
pe’ople itself, as simply and as readily as any crowd of civilized 
people, even in modern society, parts two people who are fighting, 
or interferes to prevent a woman from being assaulted. And, sec- 
ondly, we know that the fundamental social cause of excesses, 
wfiich consist of violating the rules of social intercourse, is the 
exploitation of the masses, their want and their poverty. With the 
removal of this chief cause, excesses will inevitably begin to “wither 



THE STATE AND REIOIAJIION 


107 


away.’’ We do not know how quickly and in what order, but wc 
kno\v' that they will wither atvay. With their withering away tha 
State will also wither away. 

Without indulging in utopias, Marx defined more fully what 
can be defined now regarding this future, namely, the difference 
between the lower and higher phases (degrees, stages) of Commun- 
ist society. 

3. THE FIRST PHASE OF COMMUNIST SOCIETY 

In the Critique of the Gotha Program, Marx goes into some 
detail to disprove Lassalle’s idea that under Socialifem the worker 
will receive the “undiminished” or “whole proceeds of his la- 
bour.” Marx shows that from the whole of the social labour of 
society it is necessary to deduct a reserve fund, a fund for the 
expansion of production, for the replacement of “used up” machin- 
ery, and so on; then, also, from the means of consumption must 
be deducted a fund for the costs of administration, for schools, 
hospitals, homes for the aged, and so on. 

Instead of Lalssalle’s hazy, obscure, general phrase (“the whole 
proceeds of his labour to the worker”) Marx makes a sober esti- 
mate of exactly how Socialist society will have to manage its 
affairs. Marx proceeds to make a concrete analysis of the con- 
ditions of life of a society in which there will be no capitalism, 
and says: 

“What we have to deal with here [in analysing the pro- 
gram of the workers’ party] is a Communist society, not as it 
has developed on its own foundation, but, on the contrary, as 
it emerges from capitalist society; which is thus in every re- 
spect, economically, morally and intellectually, still stamped 
with the birthmarks of the old society from whose womb it 
emerges,” 



108 


V. I. LENIN 


And it is this Communist society — a Society which has just 
come into the world out of the womb of capitalism and which, in 
every respect, bears the birthmarks of the old society — that Marx 
terms the “first,” or lower phase of Communist society. 

The means of production are no longer the private properly 
of individuals. The means of production belong to the whole of 
society. Every member of society, jrerforming a certain part of the 
socially-necessary labour, receives a certificate from society to the 
effect that he has done such and such an amount of work. And 
with this certificate he draws from the social stock of means of 
consumption a corresponding quantity of products. After deduc- 
tion of the amount of labour which goes to the public fund, every 
worker, therefore, receives from society as much as he has given it. 

“Equality” apparently reigns supreme. 

But when Lassalle, having such a social order in view (usual- 
ly called Socialism, but termed by Marx the first phaSe of Com- 
munism), speaks of this as “equitable distribution,” and says 
that this is “the equal right” of “all members of society” to 
“equal proceeds of labour,” he' is mistaken, and Marx e.xposes 
his error. 

“Equal right,” says Marx, we indeed have here; but it is s t i 1 1 
a “bourgeois right,” which, like every right, presupposes 
inequality. Every right is an application of an equal 
standard to different people who in fact are not alike, are not 
equal to one another; that is why “equal right” is really a viola- 
tion of equality and an injustice. As a matter of fact, every man. 
having performed as much social labour as another, received an 
equal share of the social product (after the above-mentioned de- 
ductions) . 

But people are not alike: one is strong, another is weak; one 
is married, another is not ; one has more children, another has less, 
and so on. And the conclusion Marx drarvfe is: 



THE STATE AND DEVOLUTION 


109 


. . With an equal output and hence an equal share in the 
social consumption fund, one will in fact receive more than 
another, one will be richer than another, and so on. To avoid 
all these defects, right, instead of being equal, would have to 
be unequal. . . 

Hence, the first phase of Communism cannot yet produce just- 
ice and equality; differences, and unjust differences, in wealth 
will still exist, but the exploitation of man by man will have be- 
come impossible, because it will be impossible to seize the means 
of production, the factories, machines, land, etc., as private prop- 
erty. In smashing Lassalle's petty-bourgeois, confused phrases 
about “equality” and “justice” in general, Marx shows the course 
of development of Communist society, which at first is compelled 
to abolish only the “injustice” of the means of production having 
been seized by private individuals, and which cannot at once abol- 
ish the other injustice, which consists in the distribution of articles 
of consumption “according to the amount of labour performed” 
(and not according to needs). 

The vulgar economists, including the bourgeois professors and 
also “our” Tugan-Baranovsky, constantly reproach the Socialists 
with forgetting the inequality of people and with “dreaming” of 
abolishing this inequality. Such a reproach, as we see, only 
proves the extreme ignorance of Messieurs the Bourgeois Ideologists. 

Marx not only scrupulously lakes into account the inevitable 
inequality of men but he also take& into account the fact that the 
mere conversion of the means of production into the common prop- 
erty of the whole of society (usually called “Socialism”) does 
not remove the defects of distribution and the inequality of 
“bourgeois right” which continue to prevail as long as products 
are divided “according to the amount of labour performed.” (Con- 
tinuing, Marx says: 



110 


V. I. LENIN 


“But these defects are inevitable in the firtet phase of Com- 
munist society as it is when it has just emerged after prolonged 
birth pangs from capitalist society. Right can never be higher 
than the economic structure of society and the cultural develop- 



And so, in the first phase of Communist Society (usually called 
Socialism) “bourgeois right” is no t abolished in its entirety, but 
only in part, only in proportion to the economic transformation 
so far attained, i.e., only in respect of the means of production. 
“Bourgeois right” recognizes them as the private property of 
individuals. Socialism converts them into common property. To 
that extent — ^and to that extent alone — “bourgeois right” disappears. 

However, it continues to exist as far as its other part is con- 
cerned; it continues to exist in the capacity of regulator (determin- 
ing factor) in the distribution of products and the allotment of 
labour among the members of society. The Socialist principle: “He 
who does not work, neither shall he eat,” is already realized; the 
other Socialist principle: “An equal amount of products for an 
equal amount of labour,” is also already realized. But this is not 
yet Communism, and it does not yet abolish “bourgeois right,” 
which gives to unequal individuals, in return for an unequal 
(actually unequal) amount of labour, an equal amount of pro- 
ducts. 

This is a “defect,” says Marx, but it is unavoidable in the first 
phase of Communism; for if we are not to indulge in utopianism, 
we must not think that having overthrown capitalism people will 
at once learn to work for society without any standard of right; and 
indeed the abolition of capitalism does not immediately create the 
economic premises for such a change. 

^And there is ate yet no other standard than that of “bourgeois 
right.” To this extent, therefore, there is still need for a state. 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


111 


vvhicli, ivhile safeguarding the public ownership of the means of 
production would safeguard equality of labour and equality in the 
distribution of products. 

The state withers away in so far as there are no longer any 
capitalists, any claisses, and, consequently, no class can be sup- 
pressed. 

But the state has not yet completely withered away, since there 
still remains the safeguarding of “bourgeois right,” which sancti- 
fies actual inequality. For the complete withering away of the state 
complete Communism is necesteary. 

4. THE HIGHER PHASE OF COMMUNIST SOCIETY 
Marx continues: 

“In a higher phase of Communist society, after the enslav- 
ing subordination of individuals under division of labour, and 
therewith also the antithesis between mental and physical la- 
bour, has vanished; after labour, from a merst means of life, 
has itself become the prime necessity of life,*' after the produc- 
tive forces have also increased with the all-round development 
of the individual, and all the springs of co-operative wealth 
flow more abundantly — only then can the narrow horizon of 
bourgeois right be fully left behind and society inscribe on 
its banners: From each according to his ability, t o each accord- 
!” 

Only now can we appreciate to the full the correctness of 
Engels’ remarks in which he mercilessly ridiculed the absurdity 
of combining the words “freedom” and “state.” While the state 
exists there is no freedom. When there will be freedom, there will 
be no state. 

The economic basis for the complete withering away of ihe 
state is such a high stage of development of Communism that the 




11-2 


V. I. LENIN 


antithesis between mental and physical labour disappears, that is 
to say, when one of the principal sources of mo^dern social inequal- 
ity disappears — a source, moreover, which cannot be removed 
immediately by the mere conversion of the means of production 
into public property, by the mere expropriation of the capitalists. 

This expropriation will facililale an enormous development of 
productive forces. And seeing how capitalism is already retarding 
this development to an incredible degree, seeing how much pro- 
gieSs could be achieved even on the basis of the present level of 
modern technique, we are entitled to say with the fullest eonfidence 
that the expropriation of the capitalists will inevitably result in 
an enormous development of the productive forces of human so- 
ciety. But how rapidly this development will proceed, how soon 
it will reach the point of breaking away from the division of la- 
bour, of removing the antithesis between mental and physical la- 
bour, or transforming labour into “the prime necessity of life” — 
we do not and cannot know. 

That is why we are entitled to speak only oT the inevitable 
withering away of the state, emphasizing the protracted nature of 
this process and its dependence upon the rapidity of development 
of the higher phase of Communism, and leaving the question of 
length of time, or the concrete forms of the withering away, quite 
open, because there is no material for an answer to these questions. 

The state will be able to wither away completely when Society 
applies the rule; H .‘From each according tg his pbiUfy, to each 
a ccording to his needs,” i.e., when people have become so accus- 
tomed to observing the fundamental rules of social intercourse and 
when their labour is so productive that they will voluntarily work 
according to their ability. “The narrow horizon of bourgeois right,” 
nliich compels one to calculate with the stringency of a Shylock 
nbelher one has not worked half an hour more than another, 
whether one is not getting less pay than another — this narrow 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


113 


horizon will then be left behind/'^iere will then be no need for 
society to regulate the quantity of products to be distributed to 
each; each will take freely “ according to his needs.” 

From the bourgeois po int of view, it is easy to declare that 
such a social order is “ a pu re utopia” and to sneer at the Social- 
ists for promising everyone the right to receive from society, with- 
out any control of the labour of the individual citizen, any quantity 
of truffles, automobile^, pianos, etc. Even now, most bourgeois 
“savants” confine themselves to sneering in this way, thereby dis- 
playing at once their ignorance and their mercenary defence of 
capitalism. 

Ignorance — for it has never entered the head of any Socialist 
to “promise” that the higher phase of the development of Com- 
munism will arrive; but the great Socialists, in foreseeing its arriv- 
al, presuppose not the present productivity of labour and not the 
present ordinary run of people, who like the seminary students 
in Pomyalovsky’s stories,* are capable of damaging the stocks of 
social wealth “just for fun” and of demanding the impossible. 

Until the “higher” phase of Communism arrives, the Socialists 
demand the strictest control by society and by the state of the meas- 
ure of labour and the measure of consumption; but this control 
must start with the expropriation of the capitalists, with the estab- 
lishment of workers’ control over the capitalists, and must be car- 
ried out not by a state of bureaucrats, but by a state of armed 
workers. 

The mercenary defence of capitalism by the bourgeois ideolo- 
gists (and their hangerS-on, like Messrs. Tsereteli, Chernov and 
Co.) lies in their substituting controversies and discussions about 
the distant future for the essential and imperative questions of 

The reference here is to N. Pomyalovsky’s Sketches of Seminary 
Life in which this Russian novelist exposed the absurd system of educatipii 
and brutal customs which held sway in the Russian theological schools in 
the fifties and sixties of the past century. — Ed, 


8— 124G 



114 


V. I. LEMIM 


present-day policy, viz., the expropriation of the capitalists, the 
conversion of all citizens into workers and employees of one huge 
“syndicate” — the whole state — and the complete subordination of 
the whole of the work of this syndicate to the really democratic 
state, the state of the Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies. 

In reality, when a learned professor, and following him the 
philistine, and following him Messrs. Tsereteli and Chernov, talk 
of the unreasonable utopias, of the demagogic promises of the 
Bolsheviks, of the impossibility of “introducing” Socialism, it is 
the higher stage or phase of Communism they have in mind, which 
no one has ever promised or even thought to “introduce,” because 
generally speaking it cannot be “introduced.” 

And this brings us to the question of the scientific difference 
between Socialism and Communism, which Engels touched on in 
his above-quoted argument about the incorrectness of the name 
“Social-Democrat.” The political difference between the first, or 
lower, and the higher pliafee of Communism will in time, probably, 
be tremendous; but it would be ridiculous to take cognizance of 
this difference now, under capitalism, and only isolated anarchists, 
perhaps, could invest it with primary importance (if there are still 
people among the anarchists who have learned nothing from the 
“Plekhanovite” conversion of the Kropotkins, the Graveses, the 
Cornelisteens and other “leading lighfl” of anarchism into social- 
chauvinists or “anarcho-trenchisls,” as Gay, one of the few anarch- 
ists who has still preserved a sense of honour and a conscience, 
has expressed it). 

But the scientific difference between Socialism and Commu- 
nism is clear. What is usually called Socialism was termed by 
Marx the “first” or lower phase of Communist society. In so far 
as the means of production become common property, the word 
'■Communism” is also applicable here, providing we do not forget 
that it is not complete Communism. The great significance of 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


116 


Marx's explanations is that here, too, he consistently applies ma- 
terialist dialectics, the doctrine of development, and regards Com- 
munism as something which develops out of capitalism. Instead 
of scholastically invented, “concocted” definitions and fruitless 
disputes about words (what is Socialism? what is Communism?), 
Marx gives an analysis of what may be called the stages in the 
economic ripeness of Communism. 

In its first phase, or first stage. Communism cannot as yet be 
fully ripe economically and entirely free from traditions and 
traces of capitalism. Hence the interesting phenomenon that Com- 
munism in its first phase retains “the narrow horizon of bourgeois 
right.” Of course, bourgeois right in regard to the distribution of 
articles of consumption inevitably presupposes the existence of the 
bourgeois state, for right is nothing without an apparatus capable 
of enforcing the observance of the standards of right. 

Consequently, not only bourgeois right, but even the bour- 
geois stale for a certain tiiM.jiemains under Communism, without 
the bourgeoisie! 

This may sound like a parado.x or simply a dialectical puzzle, 
of which Marxism is often accused by people who do not take the 
slightest trouble to study its extraordinarily profound content. 

But as a matter of fact, remnants of the old surviving in the 
new confront us in life at every step, both in nature and in society. 
And Marx did not arbitrarily insert a scrap of “bourgeois” right 
into Communism, but indicated what is economically and poli- 
tically inevitable in a society emerging from the womb of capi- 
talism. ‘ 

Democracy is of great importance to the working class in its 
struggle for emancipation from the capitalists. But democracy is 
by no means a boundary that must not he overstepped; it is only 
one of the Stages on the road from feudalism^ to c apitalist an<f 
from capitalism to Communism. 


8* 



116 


V. I. LENIN 


Democracy means equality. The great significance of the pro- 
letariat’s struggle for equality and the significance of equality as 
a slogan will be clear if we correctly interpret it as meaning the 
abolition of classes. But democracy means only formal equality. 
And as soon as equality is obtained for all members of society 
in relation to the ownership of the means of production, that is, 
equality of labour and equality of wages, humanity will inevitably 
be confronted with the question of going beyond formal equality 
to real equality, i.e., to applying the rule, “from each according 
to his ability, to each according to his needs.” By what stages, by 
what practical measures humanity will proceed to this higher aim 
— we do not and cannot know. But it is important to realize how 
infinitely mendacious is the ordinary bourgeois conception of So- 
cialism as something lifeless, petrified, fixed once for all, whereas 
in reality only under Socialism will a rapid, genuine, really 
mass forward movement, embracing first the majority and then the 
whole of the population, commence in all spheres of social and 
personal life. 

Democracy is a form of state, one of its varieties. Consequently, 
it, like every state, on the one hand represents the organized, 
systematic application of force against persons; but on the other 
hand it signifies the formal recognition of the equality of all citi- 
zens, the equal right of all to determine the structure and admin- 
istration of the state. This, in turn, is connected with the fact 
that, at a certain stage in the development of democracy, it first 
rallies the proletariat as the revolutionary class against capitalism, 
and enables it to crush, smash to atoms, wipe off the face of the 
earth the bourgeois, even the republican bourgeois, state machine, 
the standing army, the police and bureaucracy, and to substitute 
for them a more democratic state machine, but a stale machine 
nevertheless, in the shape of the armed masses of workers who are 
being transformed into a universal people’s militia. 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


117 


Here “quantity is transformed into quality”; such a degree of 
democracy implies overstepping the boundaries of bourgeois so- 
ciety, the beginning of its Socialist reconstruction. If, indeed, all 
take part in the administration of tlie state, capitalism cannot retain 
its hold. And the development of capitalism, in turn, itself creates 
the premises that really enable “all” to take part in the administra- 
tion of the state. Some of the premises are: universal literacy, 
which is alieady achieved in a number of the most advanced capi- 
talist countries, then the “training and disciplining” of millions of 
workers by the huge, complex, socialized apparatus of the post- 
office, railways, hig factories, large-scale commerce, banking, 
etc., etc. 

Given these economic premises it is quite possible, after the 
overthrow of the capitalists and bureaucrats, to proceed immediate- 
ly, overuiglit, to supersede them in the control of production and 
distribution, in the w'ork of keeping account of labour and products 
by the armed workers, by the whole of the armed population. (The 
question of control and accounting mufet not be confused with the 
question of the scientifically trained staff of engineers, agrono- 
mists and so on. These gentlemen are working today and obey the 
capitalists; they will work even better to-morrow and obey the 
armed workers.) 

Accounting and control — that is the main thing required for 
the “setting up” and correct functioning of the first phase of Com- 
munist society. All citizens are transformed into the salaried em- 
ployees of the state, which consists of the armed workers. All citi- 
zens become employees and workers of a single national state 
“syndicate.” All that is required is that they should work equally 
— do their proper share of work — and get paid equally. The ac- 
counting and control necessary for this have been simplified by 
capitalism to an extreme and reduced to the extraordinarily simple 
operations — which any literate person can perform — of checking 



118 


V. I. LENIN 


and recording, knowledge of the four rules of arithmetic, and is- 
suing receipts.* 

When the majority of the people begin independently and 
everywhere to keep such accounts and maintain such control over 
the capitalists (now converted into employees) and over the intel- 
lectual gentry who preserve their capitalist habits, this control 
will really become universal, general, national; and there will be 
no way of getting away from it, there will be “nowhere to go.” 

The whole of society will have become a single office and a 
single factory, with equality of labour and equality of pay. 

But this “factory” discipline, which the proletariat will extend 
to the whole of society after the defeat of the capitalists and the 
overthrow of the exploiters, is by no means our ideal, or our ulti- 
mate goal. It is but a necessary step for the purpose of thoroughly 
purging society of all the hideousness and foulness of capitalist 
exploitation, and for further progress. 

From the moment all members of society, or even only the vast 
majority, have learned to administer the state themselves, have 
taken this business into their own hands, have “set up” control 
ovei the insignificant minority of capitalists, over the gentry who 
wish to preserve their capitalist habits, and over the workers who 
have been profoundly corrupted by capitalism — from this moment 
the need for government begins to disappear altogether. The more 
complete democracy, the nearer the moment approaches when it 
becomes unnecessar^^^f^e more democratic the “state” which con- 
sists of the armed workers, and which is “no longer a state in the 
proper sense of the word,” the more rapidly does every form of 
the State begin to wither away. / ^ 

When most of the functions of the slate are reduced to this account- 
ing and control by the workers themselves, it will cease to be a “political 
Siate” and the “public functions will lose their political character and be 
transformed into simple administrative functions” (cf. above, Chapter IV, 
2, Engels’ “Controversy with the Anarchists”). 



THE STATE AtfD REVOLDTION 


119 


For when all have learned to administer and actually do 
administer social production independently, independently keep 
accounts and exercise control over the idlers, the gentlefolk, the 
s^('indlers and similar “guardians of capitalist traditions,” the 
escape from this national accounting and control will inevitably 
become so incredibly difficult, such a rare exception, and will prob- 
ably be accompanied by such swft and severe punishment (for 
the armed workers are practical men and not sentimental intellec- 
tuals, and they will scarcely allow anyone to trifle with them), 
that very soon the necessity of observing the simple, funda- 
mental rules of human intercourse will become a habit. 

And then the door will be wide open for the transition from 
the 6rst phase of Communifet society to its higher phase, and with 
it to the complete withering away of the state.* 

” Continuing and developing the Marxist-Leninist theory of the state 
in the new historical situation, Comrade Stalin formulated the theory of 
the Socialist State and its tasks under the conditions of victorious Socialism 
and the building up of Communism. 

In iiis Report to the Eighteenth Congress of the C.P.S.U.(B) on the 
work of the Central Committee of the Party, Comrade Stalin said: 

. , Lenin wrote his famous book. The Slate and Revolution, in August 
1917, that is, a few months before the October Revolution and the establish- 
ment of the Soviet State. Lenin considered it the main task of this book 
to defend Marx’s and Engels’ doctrine of the state from the distortions 
and vulgarizations of the opportunists. Lenin was preparing to write a 
second volume of The State and Revolution, in which he intended to sum 
up the principal lessons of the experience of the Russian revolutions of 
1905 and 1917. There can be no doubt that Lenin intended in the second 
volume of his book to elaborate and develop the theory of the state on the 
basis of the experience gained during the existence of Soviet power in our 
country. Death, however, prevented him from carrying this task into exe- 
cution. But ivhat Lenin did not manage to do should be done by his dis- 
ciples. 

“The slate arose because society split up into antagonistic clasies; 
it arose in order to keep in restraint the exploited majority in the 



120 


V. I. LENIN 


interests of the exploiting minority. The instruments of state authority 
have been mainly concentrated in the army, the punitive organs, the 
espionage service, the prisons. Two basic functions characterize the 
activity of the state: at home (the main function), to keep in restraint the 
exploited majority; abroad (not the main function), to extend the territory 
of its class, the ruling class, at the expense of the territory of other states, 
or to defend the territory of its own state from attack by other states. 
Such was the case in slave society and under feudalism. Such is the case 
under capitalism. 

‘Tn order to overthrow capitalism it was not only necessary to remove 
the bourgeoisie from power, it was not only necessary to expropriate the 
capitalists, but also to smash entirely the bourgeois state machine and its 
old army, its bureaucratic officialdom and its police force, and to substi- 
tute for it a new, proletarian form of state, a new. Socialist state. And that, 
as we know, is exactly what the Bolsheviks did. But it does not follow that 
the new proletarian state may not preserve certain functions of the old state, 
changed to suit the requirements of the proletarian state. Still less does 
it follow that the forms of our Socialist state must remain unchanged, that 
alf the original functions of our state must be fully preserved in future. 
As a matter of fact, the forms of our state are changing and will continue 
to change in line with the development of our country and with the changes 
in the international situation. 

“Lenin was absolutely right when he said: 

‘The forms of bourgeois slates are extremely varied, but in essence 
they are all the same: in one way or another, in the final analysis, 
all these states are inevitably the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie. The 
transition from capitalism to Communism will certainly create a great 
variety and abundance of political forms, but their essence will inevi- 
tably be the same: the dictatorship of the proletariat.’ {State and Re- 
volution.) 

“Since the October Revolution, our Socialist state has passed through 
two main phases in its development. 

“The first phase was the period from the October revolution to the 
elimination of the exploiting classes. The principal task in that period was 
to suppress the resistance of the overthrown classes, to organize the de- 
fence of the country against the attack of the interventionists, to restore 
industry and agriculture, and to prepare the conditions for the elimination 
of the capitalist elements. Accordingly, in this period our state performed 



THE STATE AND SEVOLUTION 


121 


two main functions. The first function was to suppress the overthrown 
classes inside the country. In this respect our state bore a superficial re- 
semblance to previous states whose functions had also been to suppress 
recalcitrants, with the fundamental difference, however, that our stale 
suppressed the e.vploiting minority in the interests of the labouring majority, 
while previous states had suppressed the exploited majority in the interests 
of the exploiting minority. The second function was to defend the country 
from foreign attack. In this respect it likewise bore a superficial resemblance 
to previous states, which also undertook the armed defence of their countries, 
with the fundamental difference, however, that our state defended from foreign 
attack the gains of the labouring majority, while previous states in sucli 
cases defended the wealth and privileges of the exploiting minority. Our 
state had yet a third function; this was the work of economic organization 
and cultural education performed by our state bodies with the purpose of 
developing the infant shoots of the new, Socialist economic system an'd 
re-educating the people in the spirit of Socialism. But this new function did 
not attain to any considerable development in that period. 

“The second phase was the period from the elimination of the capitalist 
elements in town and country to the complete victory of the Socialist eco- 
nomic system and the adoption of the new Constitution. The principal task 
in this period was to establish the Socialist economic system all over the 
country and to eliminate the last remnants of the capitalist elements, to 
bring about a cultural revolution, and to form a thoroughly modern army 
for the defence of the country. And the functions of our Socialist state 
changed accordingly. The function of military suppression inside the counti^ 
ceased, died away; for exploitation had been abolished, there were no more 
exploiters left, and so there was no one to suppress. In place of this 
function of suppression the state acquired the function of protecting So- 
cialist property from thieves and pilferers of the people’s property. The 
function of defending the country from foreign attack fully remained; 
consequently, the Red Army and the Navy also fully remained, as did 
the punitive organs and the intelligence service, which are indispensable 
for the detection and punishment of the spies, assassins and wreckers sent 
into our country by foreign espionage services. The function of economic 
organization and cultural education by the state organs also remained, and 
was developed to the full. Now the main task of our stale inside the country 
is the work of peaceful economic organization and cultural education. As 
for our army, punitive organs, and intelligence service, their edge is no 



122 


V. I. LENIN 


longer turned to the inside of the country but to the outside, against 
external enemies. 

“As you see, we now have an entirely new, Socialist state, without 
precedent in history and differing considerably in form and functions from 
the Socialist state of the first phase. 

“But development cannot stop there. We are going ahead, towards 
Communism. Will our state remain in the period of Communism also? 

“Yes, it will, unless the capitalist encirclement is liquidated, and unless 
the danger of foreign military attack has disappeared. 

“Naturally, of course, the forms of our state will again change in 
confoimity with the change in the situation at home and abroad. 

“No, it will not remain and will atrophy if the capitalist encirclement 
is liquidated and a Socialist encirclement takes its place. 

“That is how the question stands with regard to the Socialist state.” 
(See Problems oj Leninism. Moscovr, 1945, Eng. ed., pp. 635-633.) 



Chapter VI 


THE VULGARIZATION OF MARXISM 
BY THE OPPORTUNISTS 

The question of the lelation of the state to the social revolu- 
tion, and of the social revolution to the state, like the question of 
levolution generally, troubled the prominent theoreticians and 
publicists of the Second International (1889-1914) very little. But 
the most characteiistic thing in the process of the gradual growth 
of opportunism which led to the collapse of the Second Interna- 
tional in 1914, is the fact that even when these people actually 
were confronted with this question they tried to evade it or else 
failed to notice it. 

In general, it may be said that evasiveness on the question of 
the relation of the proletaiian revolution to the state — an evasive- 
ness which was to the advantage of opportunism and fostered it — 
resulted in the distortion of Marxism and in its complete vulga- 
rization. 

To characterize this lamentable process, if only briefly, we 
shall take the most prominent theoreticians of Marxism: Plekha- 
nov and Kautsky. 

1. PLEKHANOV’S CONTROVERSY WITH THE ANARCHISTS 

Plekhanov wrote a special pamphlet on the relation of anarch- 
ism to Socialism, entitled Anarchism and Socialism, published 
in German in 1894. ■“ 

Plekhanov managed somehow to treat this subject while com- 


123 



124 


V. I. LENIN 


pletely ignoring the most vital, topical, and politically most es- 
sential point in the struggle against anarchism, viz., the relalion 
of the revolution to the state, and the question of the state in gene- 
ral ! His pamphlet divides into two parts : the one is historical and 
literary, and contains valuable material on the history of the ideas 
of Stirner, Proudhon and others; the other is philistine, and con- 
tains a clumsy dissertation on the theme that an anarchist cannot 
be distinguished fiom a bandit. 

An amusing combination of subjects and most characteristic 
of Plekhanov’s whole activity on the eve of the revolution and 
duiing the revolutionary period in Russia. Indeed, in the years 
of 1905 to 1917, Plekhanov revealed himself afe a semi-doctrinaire 
and semi-philistine who, in politics, followed in the wake of the 
bourgeoisie. 

We have seen how, in their controversy with the anarchists, 
Marx and Engels very thoroughly explained their views on the 
relation of revolution to the state. In 1891, in his foreword to 
Marx’s Critique of the Gotha Program, Engels wrote that “we” — 
that is Engels and Marx — “were at that time, hardly two years 
after the Hague Congress of the [First] International, engaged in 
the most violent struggle against Bakunin and his anarchists.” 

The anarchists had tried to claim the Paris Commune as their 
“own,” so to say, afe a corroboration of their doctrine; and they 
utterly failed to understand its lessons and Marx’s analysis of 
these lessons. Anarchism has failed to give anything even approach- 
ing a true solution to the concrete political problems, viz., 
must the old state machine be smashed^ and what should 
supersede it? 

But to speak of “anarchism and Socialism” and completely 
evade the question of the state, to fail to take note of the whole 
development of Marxism before and after the Commune, inevita- 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


126 


bly means slipping into opportunism. For the very thing opportun- 
ism needs is that the two questions just mentioned should not be 
raised at all. That in itself is a victory for opportunism. 


2. ICAUTSKYB CONTROVERSY WITH THE OPPORTUNISTS 

Undoubtedly an immeasurably larger number of Kautsky’s 
wojks have been translated into Russian than into any other lan- 
guage. It is not without reason that German Social-Democrats 
sometimes say in jest that Kauteky is read more in Russia than in 
Germany (we may say parenthetically, that there is deeper histori- 
cal significance in this jest than those who first made it suspected; 
for the Russian workers, by creating in 1905 an extraordinarily 
Strong and unprecedented demand for the best works of the best 
Social-Democratic literature in the world, and by receiving trans- 
lations and editions of these works in quantities unheard of in 
other countries transplanted, so to speak, at an accelerated pace 
the enormous experience of a neighbouring, more advanced coun- 
try to the young soil of our proletarian movement). 

Besides his popularization of Marxism, Kautsky is particulaily 
known in our country for his controversy witli the opportunists, 
and with Bernstein at their head. But one fact is almost unknown, 
one w'hich cannot be overlooked if we are to set ourselves the task 
of investigating how it was that Kautsky drifted into the unbeliev- 
ably disgraceful morass of confusion and defence of social-chau- 
vinism during the great crisis of 1914-15. This fact is the follow- 
ing; shortly before he came out against the prominent representa- 
tives of opportunism in France (Millerand and Jaures) and in 
Germany (Bernstein), Kautsky betrayed very considerable vacil- 
lation. The Marxian journal, Zarya (Dawn), which was published 
in Stuttgart in 1901-02, and advocated revolutionary proletarian 
views, was forced to enter into controversy with Kautsky, to char- 



126 


V. I. LENIN 


acterize as “classic” the half-hearted, evasive and conciliatory 
resolution on the opportunists that he proposed at the Interna- 
tional Socialist Congress in Parite in 1900. Kautsky’s letters pub- 
lished in Germany reveal no less hesitancy on his part before he 
took the field against Bernstein. 

Of immeasurably greater significance, however, is the fact that, 
in his controversy with the opportunists, in hiS formulation of the 
question and his method of treating it, we can observe, now that 
ive are investigating the history of his latest betrayal of Marxism, 
his systematic gravitation towards opportunism precisely on the 
question of the state. 

Let us take Kautsky’s first important work against opportunism, 
his Bernstein and the Social-Democratic Program. Kautsky refutes 
Bernstein in detail, but the characteristic thing about it is the fol- 
lowing: Bernstein in his Premises of Socialism, of Heroslratean 
fame, accuses Marxism of “BlanquisnP’ (an accusation since re- 
peated thousands of times by the opportunists and liberal bourgeois 
in Kussia against the representatives of revolutionary Marxism, 
the Bolsheviks). In this connection Bernstein dwells particularly 
on Marx’s The Civil War in France, and triefe, quite unsuccessfully, 
as we have seen, to identify Marx’s views on the lessons of the 
Commune, with those of Proudhon. Bernstein pays particular 
attention to Marx’s conclusion, which the latter emphasized in hi.s 
1872 preface to The Communist Manifesto, viz., that “the work- 
ing class cannot simply lay hold of the ready-made state machin- 
ery and wield it for its own purpose.” 

This utterance “pleased” Bernstein so much that he repeats it 
no less than three times in his book — interpreting it in the most 
distorted opportunist sense. 

As we have feeen, Marx meant that the working class must 
smash, break, shatter {Sprengung — explode, the expression used 
by Engels) the whole state machine. But according to Bernstein 



THE STATE AND REVOLUTION 


127 


it would appear as though Marx in these words warned the work- 
ing class against excessive revolutionary zeal ^vhen seizing power. 

A cruder and more hideous distortion of Marx’s idea cannot 
be imagined. 

How, then, did Kautsky proceed in his detailed refutation of 
Bernsteinism? 

He refrained from probing the depths of the distortion of 
Marxism by opportunism on this point. He cited the above-quoted 
passage fiom Engels’ introduction to Marx’s Civil War and said 
that according to Marx the working class cannot simply lay hold 
of the ready-made state machinery, but can lay hold of it, generally 
speaking- — ^and that was all. Not a word does Kautsky utter about 
the fact that Bernstein attributed to Marx the u e r y opposite 
of Marx’s real views, about the fact that the task of the proletarian 
revolution which Marx advanced in 1852 was to “smash’’ the state 
machine. * 

The result was that the most essential dilleience betvseen 
Marxism and opportunism on the tasks of the proletarian revolu- 
tion was glossed over by Kautsky! 

“\^’e can safely leave the feolution of the problem of the 
proletarian dictatorship to the future,” said Kautsky, writing 
“against” Bernstein. (P. 172, German edition.) 

This is not an argument against Bernstein, but, in essence, a 
concession to him, a surrender to opportunism; for at present the 
opportunists ask nothing better than to “safely leave to the fu- 
ture” all fundamental questions of the tasks of the proletarian rev- 
olution. 

From 1852 to 1891. for forty years, Marx and Engels taught 
the proletariat that it must smash the state machine. Yet, in 1899, 
Kautsky, confronted on this point with the complete betrayal of 
Marxism by the opportunists, fraudulently substituted for the 



128 


V. I. LENIN 


question of whether it was necessary to smash this machine the 
question of the concrete forms in which it was to be smashed, and 
then tried to take refuge behind the “indisputable” (and barren) 
philistine truth that concrete forms cannot be known in advance!! 

A gulf separates Marx and Kautsky in their respective atti- 
tudes toivards the task of the proletarian party in preparing tlie 
working class for revolution. 

We tehall take the next, more mature, work by Kautsky, ivhich 
also, to a large extent, was written to refute opportunist errors. 
This is his pamphlet. The Social Revolution. In this pamphlet the 
author chose as his special theme the question of “the proletarian 
revolution” and “the proletarian regime.” In it he gave much that 
was exceedingly valuable, but he just evaded the question of the 
stale. Throughout the pamphlet the author Speaks of the conquest 
of state power — and nothing else; that is, he chooses a formula 
which makes a concession to the opportunists, inasmuch as it 
admits the possibility of power being seized without destroying 
the state machine. The very thing which Marx, in 1872, declared 
to be “obsolete” in the program of The Communist Manifesto is 
revived by Kautsky in 1902! 

A special section in the pamphlet is devoted to “the forms and 
weapon of the social revolution.” Here Kautsky speaks of the po- 
litical mass strike, of civil war, and of the “instruments of force 
of the modern large state, such as the bureaucracy and the army”; 
but not a word does he say about what the Commune had already 
taught the workers. Evidently, Engels’ warning, particularly to the 
German Socialists, against “superstitious reverence” for the state 
w'as not an idle one. 

Kautsky explains the matter by stating that the victorious pro- 
letariat “will carry out the democratic program,” and he goes on 
to- formulate its clauses. But not a word does he utter about the 
new things the year 1871 taught us concerning the supersession 



THE STATE A^D REVOLUTION 


]29 


of bourgeois democracy by proletarian democracy. Kautsky disposes 
of the question by ‘solid’" banalities such as: 

“Still, it goes without saying that we shall not achieve 
power under present conditions. Revolution itself presupposes 
a long and deep-going struggle, which will change our present 
political and social structure.” 

Undoubtedly, this ‘‘goes without saying,” just as doefe the truth 
that horses eat oats, or that the Volga flows into the Caspian Sea. 
Only it is a pity that an empty and bombastic phrase about “deep- 
going"’ struggle is used as a means of evading a question of vital 
interest to tlie revolutionary proletariat, namely, what expresses 
the “deep-going” nature of its revolution in relation to the state, 
in relation to democracy, as distinct from previous, non-proletarian 
revolutions. 

By evading this question, Kautsky really makes a concession 
to opportunism on this most essential point, although in words he 
declares terrible war against it and emphasizes the importance of 
the “idea of revolution” (how much is this “idea” worth when 
one is afraid to teach the workers the concrete lessons of revolu- 
tion?), or says, “revolutionary idealism before everything else,” or 
declares that the English workers are now “little more than petty 
bourgeois.” 

“The most varied forms of enterprises — bureaucratic [??], 
trade union, co-operative, private . . . can exist side by side in 
Socialist society,” Kautsky writes. “. . . There are enterprises 
which cannot do without a bureaucratic [??] organization, for 
example, the railways. Here the democratic organization might 
take the following form: the workers elect delegates who form 
a sort of parliament, which draws up the working regulations 
and supervises the management of the bureaucratic apparatus. 



V. I. LENIN 


IbU 


The management of other enterprises may be transferred to the 
trade unions; and still others may become co-operative enter- 
prises” (pp. 148 and 115 of the Russian translation published 
in Geneva in 1903). 

This reasoning is erroneous, and is a step backward compared 
with what Marx and Engels explained in the "seventies, using the 
lessons of the Commune as an example. 

As far as the alleged need for a “bureaucratic ’ organization is 
concerned, there is no difference whatever between railways and 
any other enterprise in large-scale machine industry, any factory, 
large store, or large-scale capitalist agricultural enterprise. The 
technique of all such enterprises requires the strictest discipline, the 
greatest accuracy on the part of everyone in carrying out his al- 
lotted task, for otherwise the whole enterprise would fail to work, 
or machinery or goods be damaged. In all such enterprises the 
workers will, of course, “elect delegates who will form a sort of 
parliament.” 

But the whole point is that this “sort of parliament” will ii o t 
be a parliament like the bourgeois-parliamentary institutions. The 
whole point is that this “sort of parliament” will a o t merely 
“draw up the isorking regulations and supervise the management of 
the bureaucratic apparatus,” as Kautsky, whose ideas do not go 
beyond the framework of bourgeois parliamentarism, imagines. In 
Socialist society the “sort of parliament” consisting of w'orkers’ 
deputies will, of course, “draw' up the working regulations and 
superintend the management” of the “apparatus ” — h u t this appa- 
ratus will not he “bureaucratic.” The workers, having conquered 
political power, will smash the old bureaucratic apparatus, they 
will shatter it to its very foundations, they will not leave a single 
stone of it standing; and they will put in its place a new one, 
consisting of workers and office employees, against whose 



THE ST^TE AAD REVOLUTION 


131 


transformation into bureaucrats the measures will at once be taken 
which were specified in detail by Marx and Engels: 1) not only 
election, but also recall at any time; 2) payment not exceeding 
that of a ivorkman; 3) immediate introduction of control and super- 
vision by all, so that all shall become “bureaucrats’ for a time 
and, therefore, nobody may become a “bureaucrat.’’ 

Kautsky has not reflected at all on Marx’s uords: “The Com- 
mune was to be a working, not a parliamentary body, executive 
and legislative at the same time."’ 

Kautsky haS not in the least understood the difference betueen 
bourgeois parliamentarism, which combines democracy [not for 
the people) ivith bureaucracy (against the people), 
and proletarian democracy, which will lake immediate steps to cut 
bureaucracy down to the roots, and which will be able to carry out 
these measures to the end, to the complete abolition of bureaucracy, 
to the introduction of complete democracy for the people. 

Kautsky here betrays the old “superstitious reverence’’ for the 
state, and “superstitious belief” in bureaucracy. 

We shall now pass on to the last and best of Kautsky ’s works 
against the opportunists, his pamphlet The Road to Rower (which. 
1 believe, has not been translated into Russian, for it was published 
at the time when the severest reaction reigned here, in 19091. This 
pamphlet marks a considerable step forward, inasmuch as it does 
not deal with the revolutionary program in general, as in the 
pamphlet of 1899 against Bernstein, nor with the tafeks of the 
social revolution irrespective of the time of its occurrence, as in 
the pamphlet, The Social Revolution, 1902; it deals with the 
concrete conditions which compel us to recognize that the “rerolu- 
tionary era” is approaching. 

The author definitely calls attention to the intensification ^of 
class antagonisms in general and to imperialism, which plays a 
particularly important part in this connection. After the “revolu- 



132 


V. I. LENIN 


tionary period of 1789-1871” in Western Europe, he says, a similar 
period began in the East in 1905. A world war is approaching 
with menacing rapidity. ‘‘The proletariat can no longer talk of 
premature revolution.” “We have entered a revolutionary period.” 
The ‘ revolutionary era is beginning.” 

These declarations are perfectly clear. This pamphlet of Kaut- 
feky’s should serve as a measure of comparison between what Ger- 
man Social-Democracy promised to be before the imperialist war 
and the depth of degradation to which it — Kautsky included — fell 
when the war broke out. “The present situation,” Kautsky wrote, in 
the pamphlet we are examining, “brings the danger that we (t.e., 
German Social-Democracy) may easily appear to be more moderate 
than we are.” Actually, it turned out that the German Social-Dem- 
ocratic Party was much more moderate and opportunist than it 
appeared to be! 

The more characteristic is it. therefore, that although he 
definitely declared that the revolutionary era had already begun, 
Kautsky, in the pamphlet which he himself said was devoted pre- 
cisely to an analysis of the ‘Apolitical revolution,” again completely 
evaded the question of the state. 

These evasions of the question, these omissions and equivoca- 
tions. inevitably led in their sum total to that complete surrender to 
opportunism with which we shall now have to deal. 

German Social-Democracy, in the person of Kautsky, teeems to 
have declared: I keep to revolutionary views (1899), I recognize, 
in particular, the inevitability of the social revolution of the 
proletariat (1902), I recognize the approach of a new revolution- 
ary era (1909). Still, now that the question of the tasks of the 
proletarian revolution in relation to the state is being raised, I go 
back on what Marx said as long ago as 1852 (1912). 

It was precisely in this direct form that the question was put 
in Kautsky’s controversy with Pannekoek. 



THE STATE AND nEVOLETION 


133 


3. KAUTSKY S CONTROVERSY WITH PANNEKOEK 

In opposing Kautsky, Pannekoek came out as one of the repie- 
sentatives of the “Left radical” trend which counted in its ranks 
Rosa Luxemburg, Karl Radek and others. Advocating revolution- 
ary tactics, they were united in the conviction that Kautsky -was 
going over to the position of the “centre,” which wavered without 
principles between Marxism and opportunism. The correctness of 
this view was fully confirmed by the war, ^vhen this “centre” 
(wrongly called Marxist) trend, or Kaulsk}ism, revealed itself in 
all its repulsive wretchedness. 

In an article touching on the question of llie stale, ezititled 
“Mass Action and Revolution” (A'et/e Zeit, 1912. Voi. XXX, 2), 
Pannekoek characterized Kautsky’s position as an attitude of 
“passive radicalism,” as “a theory of inactive waiting.” “Kautsky 
loses sight of the process of revolution.” said Pannekoek 

(p. 616). 

In presenting the problem in this way, Pannekoek approached 
the subject which interests us, namely, the tasks of the proletarian 
revolution in relation to the state. 

“The struggle of the proletariat, ' he wrote, "is not merely 
a struggle against the bourgeoisie /or state power, but a struggle 
against state power. . . . The content of the proletarian revolu- 
tion is the destruction and dissolution [Au/ldsung] of the instru- 
ments of power of the stale with the aid of the instruments of 
power of the proletariat. . . . The struggle will cease only wdieii 
the organization of the state is utterly destroyed. The organiza- 
tion of the majority will then have demonstrated its superiority 
by having destroyed the organization of the ruling minojily” 
(p. 548). 



134 


V. I. LENT>- 


The formulation in which Pannckoek presented his ideas suf- 
fers from serious defects, but its meaning is sufficiently clear: and 
it is interesting to note how Kautsky combated it. 

“Up to now,” he wrote, “the difference between the Social- 
Democrats and the anarchists has been that the former wished 
to conquer state power while the latter wished to destroy it. 
Pannckoek wants to do both” (p. 724). 

Although Pannekoek’s exposition lacks concreteness — not to 
speak of other defects in his article which have no bearing on the 
present subject — Kauteky seized on the principle of the issue in- 
dicated by Pannekoek; and on this fundamental question of prin- 
ciple Kautsky abandoned the Marxian position entirely and com- 
pletely went over to opportunism. His definition of the difference 
between the Social-Democrats and the anarchists is absolutely 
wrong, and he utteily vulgarized and distorted Marxism. 

The difference between the Marxists and the anarchists is this: 
1) the former, while aiming at the complete abolition of the state, 
recognize that this aim can only be achieved after classes have 
been abolished by the Socialist revolution, as the result of the 
establishment of Socialism, which leads to the withering away of 
the state; the latter want to abolish the fetate completely overnight, 
failing to undersland the conditions under which the state can be 
abolished. 2} The former recognize that after the proletariat has 
conquered political power it must utterly destroy the old state 
machine and substitute for it a new one consisting of the organiza- 
tion of the armed workers, after the type of the Commune; the 
latter, while insisting on the detetruction of the state machine, have 
absolutely no clear idea of what the proletariat will put in its 
place and how it will use its revolutionary power; the anarchists 
eve:i deny that the revolutionary proletariat should utilize the state 
power, that is. they deny its revolutionary dictatorship. 3) The 



THE STATE AND KEVOLUTION ]35 

foTHier demand that the proletariat be prepared for revolution by 
utilizing the present state; the anarchists reject this. 

In this controversy it is Pannekoek and not Kautsky who rep- 
resents Marxism, for it was Marx who taught that the proletariat 
cannot simply conquer state power in the sense that the old state 
apparatus passes into new hands, but must smash, break this appa- 
ratus and substitute a new one for it. 

Kautsky abandons Marxism for the camp of the opportunists, 
for this destruction of the state machine, rvhich is utterly unaccept- 
able to the opportunists, completely disappears from his argument, 
and he leavete a loop-hole which enables them to interpret “con- 
quest” as simply meaning the winning of a majority. 

To cover up his distortion of Marxism, Kautsky behaves like 
a pedant: he juggles with “quotations” from Marx himself. In 
1850 Marx wrote that “a decisive centralization of power in the 
hands of the state” was necessary, and Kautsky triumphantly asks: 
does Pannekoek want to destroy “centralism”? 

This is simply a trick, similar to Bernstein’s identification of 
the views of Marxism and Proudhonism on the subject of federal- 
ism veisus centralism. 

Kautsky's “quotation” is neither here nor there. The new state 
machine permits of centralism as much as the old. If the workers 
voluntarily unite their armed forces, this will be centralism, but 
this centralism will be based on the “complete destruction’’ of the 
centralized state apparatus — the standing army, the police and the 
bureaucracy. Kautsky acts exactly like a swindler when he ignores 
the perfectly well-known arguments of Marx and Engels on the 
Commune and plucks out a quotation which has nothing to do 
^vith the case. 


“Perhaps Pannekoek,” Kautsky continues, “wants to abolish 
the state functions of the officials? But we cannot do without 



136 


V. I. LENIN 


officials in the party and the trade unions, much less in the 
state administration. Our program does not demand the aboli- 
tion of state officials, hut that they be elected by the people. . . . 
We are not discussing here the form the administrative ap- 
paratus of the ‘future state’ will assume, but whether our polit- 
ical struggle will dissolve [auflosl] the state power before lie 
have captured it [Kautsky’s italics]. Which Ministry and its 
officials could be abolished?” Then follows an enumeration of 
the Ministers of Education, Justice, Finance and War. “No, not 
one of the present Ministries will be removed by our political 
struggle against the government. ... I repeat, in order to avoid 
misunderstanding: we are not discussing here the form the 
‘future state’ will assume as a result of the victory of Social- 
Democracy, but as to how our opposition will change the pres- 
ent state” (p. 725). 

This is an obvious trick: Pannekoek raised the question of 
revolution. Both the title of his article and the passages quoted 
above clearly indicate this: la skipping to the question of “op- 
position” Kautsky substitutes the opportunist lor the revolutionary 
point of view. What he says is: at pr^eni we are an opposition; 
what we shall be after we have captured power, that w’e shall see. 
Revolution has vanished] And that is exactly what the opportunists 
wanted. 

Opposition and the political struggle in general are beside the 
point ; we are concerned with revolution. Revolution means that the 
proletariat will destroy the “administrative apparatus” and the 
whole state machine, and substitute for it a new one, consisting 
of the armed workers. Kautsky reveals a “superstitious reverence” 
for “Ministries,” but why can they not be superseded, say, by 
committees of experts, working under sovereign, all-powerful So- 
viets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies? 



THE STATE AND REVOLl’TiON 


137 


The point is not whether the “Minisliies'’ -^sill remain, or 
whether “committees of experts” or other institutions will be set 
up; this is quite unimportant. The point is whether the old state 
machine (connected by thousands of threads with the bourgeoisie 
and completely saturated with routine and inertia) shall remain, or 
be destroyed and superseded by a new one. Revolution must not 
mean that the new class will command, govern with the aid of the 
old state machine, but that this class will smash this machine and 
command, govern ivith the aid of a new machine. Kautsky slurs 
over this jundamental idea of Marxism, or he has utterly failed to 
understand it. 

His question about officials clearly shows that he does not 
understand the lessons of the Commune or the teachings of Marx. 
“Wecannotdo without officials in the party and the tiade unions...."’ 

We cannot do without officials under capitalism, under the rule 
of the bourgeoisie. The proletariat is oppressed, the toiling masses 
are enslaved by capitalism. Under capitalism democracy is restrict- 
ed, cramped, curtailed, mutilated by all the conditions of wage- 
slavery, the poverty and misery, of the masses. This is why, and 
the only reason why, the officials of our political and industrial 
organizations are corrupted — or, more precisely, tend to be cor- 
rupted — by the conditions of capitalism and betray a tendency to 
become bureaucrats, i.e., privileged persons divorced from the mass- 
es and standing above the masses. 

That is the essence of bureaucracy; and until the capitalists 
have been expropriated and the bourgeoisie overthrown, even prole- 
tarian officials will inevitably be “bureaucratized” to some extent. 

According to Kautsky, since we shall have elected officials under 
Socialism, we shall still have bureaucrats; bureaucracy will remain! 
This is exactly where he is wrong. It rvas precisely the example of 
the Commune that Marx quoted to show that under Socialismuoffi- 
cials will cease to be “bureaucrats”; they will cease to be so in 



138 


V. I. LENIN 


propoilioa as, in addition to the election of officials, the principle 
of recall at any time is introduced, and as salaries are reduced to 
the level of the wages of the average worker, and too, as parlia- 
mentary institutions are Superseded by “working bodies, executive 
and legislative at the same time.” 

In essence, the whole of Kautsky’s argument against Pannekoek 
and particularly his wonderful point that we cannot do without of- 
ficials even in our party and trade union organizations, is merely 
a repetition of Bernstein’s old “arguments” against Marxism in 
general. In his renegade hook. The Premises of Socialisin. Bernstein 
combats “primitive” democracy, combats what he calls “doctrinaire 
democracy,” imperative mandates, unpaid officials, impotent central 
representative bodies, etc. To prove that “primitive democracy” is 
unsound, Bernstein refers to the experience of the British trade 
unions, as interpreted by the Webbs. Seventy years of develop- 
ment “in absolute freedom,” he says (p. 137, German edition), 
convinced the trade unions that primitive democracy was useless, 
and they substituted ordinary democracy for it. i.e.. parliamenta- 
rism combined tvith bureaucracy. 

As a matter of fact the tiade unions did not develop “in 
absolute freedom” but in absolute capitalist slavery, under which a 
number of concessions to the prevailing evil, violence, falsehood, 
exclusion of the poor from the affairs of the “higher” administra- 
tion. “cannot be avoided.” Under Socialism much of the “primitive” 
democracy will inevitably be revived, since, for the first time in 
the history of civilized society, the mass of the population will rise 
to take an independent part, not only in voting and elections, but 
also in the everyday administration of affairs. Under Socialism 
.7 1 1 will take part in the work of government in turn and will soon 
become accustomed to no one governing. 

^ Marx’s critico-analytical genius perceived in the practical meas- 
ures of the Commune the turning point, which the opportunists fear 



THE ST\TE AND IlLVOLUTIO-N 


139 


and do not waiit to recognize because of their cowardice, because 
they are reluctant to break irrevocably ^vith the bourgeoisie, and 
which the anarchists do not want to perceive, either through haste 
or through a general lack of understanding of the conditions of 
great social changes. “\^’e must not even think of destroying the 
old state machine; hou-, then, can we hope to do without Ministries 
and oJEcials?” argues the opportunist who is completely saturated 
with philistinism, and \vho, in fact, not only does not believe in revo- 
lution, in the creative power of revolution, but actuall) lives in mor- 
tal dread of it (like our Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries). 

“We must think only of destroying the old state machine; it i.s 
no use studying the concrete lessons of earlier prpletarian revolu- 
tions and analysing who to put in the place of what has been 
destroyed, and how" argues the anarchist (the best of the anarch- 
ists. of course, and not those who, with Messrs. Kropotkin and 
Co., follow in the wake of the bourgeoisie) : consequently, the 
tactics of the anarchists become the tactics of despair instead of a 
ruthlessly bold reyohitionar} effort to solve concrete problems while 
taking into account the practical conditions of the mass movement. 

Marx teaches us to a\oid both kinds of error; he teaches us 
to display boundless audacity in destroying the old state machine 
entirely and at the same time he teaches us to put the question 
concretely: the Commune was able in the space of a few weeks to 
start building a neiv, proletarian slate machine by introducing such- 
and-such measui'es to secure wider democracy and to uproot 
bureaucracy. Let us learn revolutionary audacity from the Com- 
munards; let us see in their practical measured the outline of 
practically-urgent and immediately-possible measures, and then, 
pursuing this road, ive shall achieve the complete destruction of 
bureaucrac)’. 

The possibility of this destruction is guaranteed by the fact 
that Socialism ivill shorten the working day. will raise the masses 



140 


V. r. LENIN 


to a new life, will create conditions for the majority of the pojjula- 
tion that will enable everybody, without exception, to per- 
form “state functions,” and this will lead to the complete ivither- 
ing away of the state in general. - 

“The object of the mass strike,” Kautsky continues, “cannot 
be to destroy the fetate power; its only object can be to wring 
concessions from the government on some particular question, 
or to replace a hostile government by one that nould be more 
yielding [enlgegenlconimende^ to the proletariat. . . . But never, 
under any conditions, can it [the proletarian \ictory over a 
hostile go\ernment] lead to the destruction of the state power; 
it can lead only to a certain shifting [Verschieban.g~\ of the 
relation of forces within the state power. . . . The aim of our 
political struggle lemains. a-> hitherto, the conquest of state pow- 
er by winning a majority in parliament and b> converting par- 
liament into the master of the government'’ (pp. 726, 727. 732 j. 

This is nothing but the purest and most \ulgar opportunism; 
a repudiation of revolution in deed, while accepting it in \\ord. 
Kautsky’s imagination goes no further than a “gov ernment . . . that 
would be more yielding to the proletariat’’ — a step backward to 
philistinism compared with 1847, when The Communist Manifesto 
proclaimed “the organization of the proletariat as the ruling dates.” 

Kautsky will have to achieve his beloved “unity” with the Schei- 
demanns, Plekhanovs and Vanderveldes, all of whom agree to fight 
for a government “that would be more yielding to the proletariat.” 

But we shall make for a split with these traitors to Socialism, 
and we shall fight for the complete destruction of the old state 
machine, in order that the armed proletariat itself shall become the 
government. That is a big difference. 

‘ Kautteky may enjoy the pleasant company of the Legiens, 
Davids, Plekhanovs, Potresovs. Tseretelis and Chernovs, who are 



THE ST\TE \ND IIE\ OLnilO-N 


141 


quite willing to work for the “shifting of the relation of forces 
within the state power,'’ for “winning a majority in parliament,” 
and converting parliament into the “master of the government.” 
A most worthy object, which is wholly acceptable to the opportun- 
ists and which keeps everything within the framework of the bour- 
geois parliamentary republic. 

But we shall make for a split with the opportunists; and the 
whole class-conscious proletariat will be with us in the fight — not 
for the purpose of shifting the relation of forces, but for the pur- 
pose of overthrowing the bourgeoisie, destroying bourgeois parlia- 
mentarism, for a democratic republic after the type of the Com- 
mune, or a republic of Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, 
for the revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat. 


To the right of Kautsky in international Socialism there are 
trends such as the Socialist Monthly in Germany (Legien, David. 
Kolb and many others, including the Scandinavians Stauning and 
Branting); the followers of Jaurfe and Vandervelde in France and 
Belgium; Turati, Treves and other representatives of the Right 
wing of the Italian Party; the Fabians and “Independents” (the 
Independent Labour Party, which, in fact, has always been depend- 
ent on the Liberals) in England; and the like. All these gentry 
who play a great, very often a predominant role in the parliamen- 
tary work and the press of the party, openly repudiate the dictator- 
ship of the proletariat and pursue a policy of unconcealed opportun- 
ism. In the eyes of these gentry, the “dictatorship” of the proletariat 
“contradicts” democracy!! There is really no essential difference 
between them and the petty-bourgeois democrats. 

Taking this circumstance into consideration, we are justified'in 
drawing the conclusion that the Second International, in the case 



142 


V. I. LENIN 


of the overwhelming majority of its official representatives, has 
completely sunk into opportunism. The experience of the Commune 
has been not only forgotten, but distorted. Instead of inculcating 
in the workers’ minds the idea that the time is nearing when they 
mufet rise up and smash the old state machine and substitute for it 
a new one, and in this way make their political rule the founda- 
tion for the Socialist reconstruction of society, they have actually 
taught the workers the very opposite and have depicted the “con- 
quest of power’’ in a way that has left thousands of loop-holes for 
opportunism. 

The distortion and hushing up of the question of the relation 
of the proletarian revolution to the state could not but play an 
immense role at a time when the states, with their military appara- 
tus enlarged as a consequence of imperialist rivalry, had been 
transformed into military monsters which were exterminating mil- 
lions of people in order to decide whether England or Germany — 
this or that finance capital — was to rule the world.'" 


The MS, continues as follows: 

C n A P T E R VII 

THE EXPERIENCE OF THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTIONS 
OF 1905 AND 1917 

The subject indicated in the title of this chapter is so \ast that volumes 
could and should be written about it. In the present pamphlet it will be 
necessary to confine ourselves, naturally, to the most important lessons 
ofcexperience, those touching directly upon the tasks of the proletariat in 
the revolution in relation to state power.